 

Course Title: System Analysis and Design (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS203

Year/Semester: U/TII

Class Load: 4 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs, Tutorial: 1 Hr.)

Course Description

This course mainly focuses on different aspect of system analysis and design such °
as foundation, planning, analysis, design, implementation and maintenance.

Course Objectives

The general objective of this course is to provide concepts related to information
systems development in a systematic approach including foundations, planning,
analysis, design, implementation and maintenance.

Course Contents

Unit 1 System Development Fundamentals 9 Hrs.
a. The Systems Development Environment
Introduction, Modern Approach of System Analysis and Design, Information
System and its ‘ype, Developing Information Systems and the Systems
Development Life Cycle, The Heart of the Systems Development Process, The
Traditional Waterfall SDLC, Approaches for Improving Development, CASE
Tools, Rapid Application Development, Service-Oriented Architecture, Agile
Methodologies, eXtreme Programming. Object- Oriented Analysis and Design
b. The Origins of Software
Introduction, System Acquisition, Reuse
c. Managing the Information Systems Project
Introduction, Managing Information Systems Project, Representing and
Scheduling Project Plans, Using Project Management Software

Unit 2 Planning 7 Hrs.
a. System Development Projects: Identification and Selection
Introduction, Identifying and Selecting Systems Development Projects, Corporate
and Information Systems Planning
b. System Development Projects: Initiation and Planning
Introduction, Initiating and Planning Systems Development Projects, Process of
Initiating" and Planning IS Development Projects, Assessing Project Feasibility,
Building and Reviewing the Baseline Project Plan

Unit 3 Analysis 13 Hrs.
a. System Requirements हे? त )
Introduction, Performing Requitg RE Determination, Traditional Methods for
Determining Requirementsy Contemporaiy Methods for Deterinining System
Requirements, Radical Methods for Determining System. Requirements,

WW Page | 44

८
Requirements Management Tools, Requirements Determination Using Agile
Methodologies

b. System Process Requirements

Introduction, Process Modeling, Data Flow Diagramming Mechanics, Using Data
Flow Diagramming in the Analysis Process, Modeling Logic with Decision
Tables

ce. System Data Requirements

Introduction, Conceptual Data Modeling, Gathering Information for Conceptual
Data Modeling, Introduction to E-R Modeling, Conceptual Data Modeling and
the E-R Model, Representing Super-types and Sub-types, Business Rules, Role of
Packaged Conceptual Data Models — Database Patterns

Unit 4 Design 12 Hrs.
a. Designing Databases
Introduction, Database Design, Relational Database Model, Normalization,
Transforming E-R Diagrams into Relations, Merging Relations, Physical File
and Database Design, Designing Fields, Designing Physical Tables
b. Designing Forms and Reports
Introduction, Designing Forms and Reports, Formatting Forms and Reports,
Assessing Usability
c. Designing Interfaces and Dialogues
Introduction, Designing Interfaces and Dialogues, Interaction Methods and
Devices, Designing Interfaces and Dialogues in Graphical Environments

Unit 5 Implementation and Maintenance 4 Hrs.
a, System Implementation
Introduction, System Implementation, Software Application Testing, Installation,
Documenting the System, Training and Supporting Users, Organizational Issues
in Systems Implementation
b, System Maintenance
Introduction, Maintaining Information Systems, Conducting Systems
Maintenance

Teaching Methods

‘The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group discussions, case
studies, guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and
practical), and examinations (writteti and verbal), depending upon the nature of
the topics. The teaching faculty will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy
as per the need of the topics. ७4

Page | 45

 

 
Evaluation

 
  

    
 
 

   
  
 
    

Examination Scheme

Internal Assessment
बा
“| । (3 Hrs.) | |
Text Book

1. Jeffrey A. Hoffer, Joey George, Joe Valacich, “Modern Systems Anatysis and
Design’, 6/E, Prentice Hall India,

External Assessment

     
 

 
 

Reference Book 2
2. Jeffery Whitten, Lonnie Bentley, “Systems Analysis and Design. Methods”,
7/E, McGraw-Hill ८” 2 ,

Page | 46

   
