PREEFFFFEEEEEEEEEEEEEI

Course Title: Probability & Statistics (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS202

Year/Semester: I/TI

Class Load: 5 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs, Tutorial: 1 Hr., Practical: 1 Hr.)

Course Description Description

This course covers basic concept of statistics, measurement of central tendency,
correlation & regression analysis, probability, sample survey, sample survey
methods and design of experiment. These topics are essential tools for research.

Course Objective
The general objectives of this course are to provide fundamental concept of
Statistics, Probability, Sample Survey and their applications in the area of Social
Science and Computer Application,

Course Contents

Unit 1 Introduction to Statistics 3 Hrs.
Meaning. Scope and Limitations of Statistics, Types and Sources of Data,
Methods and Problems of Collection of Primary and Secondary Data.

Unit 2 Descriptive Statistics 6 Hrs.
Measure of Central Tendency (Arithmetic Mean, Median, Partition Values,
Mode); Measure of Dispersion (Absolute and Relative Measures: Range, Quartile
Deviation, Mean Deviation. Standard Deviation. and Coefficient of Variation)

Unit 3 Correlation and Regression Analysis 6 Hrs.
Correlation: Definition, Scatter diagram, Karl Pearson’s coefficient of
correlation, Numerical problems for determination of Correlation Coefficients.
Regression: Definition, Dependent and Independent Variables, Least Square
method only, Numerical Problems,

Unit 4 Probability 8 Hrs.
Definition of Probability, Two basic Laws of Probability(, without proof),
Conditional Probability: Probability Distributions (Binomial, Poisson and
Normal); simple numerical problems.

Unit 5 Sample Survey 6 Hrs.
Concept of Population and Sample; Needs of Sampling: Censuses and Sample
Survey; Basie Concept of Sampling: Organizational Aspect of Sample Sury
Questionnaire Design: Sample Selection and Determination of
Sampling and Non Sampling Erfors, <f)

 

 

Sample Size:

 

Unit 6Sample Survey Methods > br 3 10 Hrs.
Types of Sampling: Simple Random Sampling with and without Replacement;

\ fi Page | 41
AA ०

 
 

3 Random Sampling: Ratio and Regression Method of Estimation under
Simple and Stratified Random Sampling; Systematic Sampling; Cluster
Sampling: Multistage Sampling: Probability Proportion to Size Sampling (PPS),
Estimation of Population Total and its Variance. Sampling Distributions (t, ४, 2)
and Related Problems.

Unit 7 Design of Experiment 6 Hrs.
Concept of Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), F -Statistic and its Distribution,
Linear Model in ANOVA, Analysis of One Way, ‘l'wo Way Classification (1 and
m observations per cell) in Fixed Effect Model.

Laboratory Works
Techniques for using the computer as a tool in the analysis of statistical problems
will be introduced. SPSS software should be used for data analysis

Teaching Methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group discussions, case
studies, guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and
practical), and examinations (written and verbal), depending upon the nature of

the topics. The teaching faculty will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy
as per the need of the topics.

7
20 20 60
(3 Hrs.) (3 Hrs.)

Text Books ~
1. Mukhopadhyay P., “Yheory and Methods of Survey Sampling”, Prentice Hall of
India, New Delhi, 1998.
2. Sheldon M. Ross, “Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Engineers and
Scientists”, 3" Edition, India, AcademicDress, 2005.

४:

Evaluation

    
   
 

  

    
       

Reference Books 124 5
1. Cochran W.G., “Sampling Techniques”, 3" edition, John Wiley-and Sons, Inc.

New York, 1977. be j
( १“

५ २ Page | 42
oN /
०

Hoggg & Tanis, “Probability and Statistical Inference”, 6" edition, First Indian
Reprint, 2002

Montgomery Douglas C., “Design and Analysis of Experiments”, 5" edition, John
Wiley & Sons Inc., 2001.

Upadhayay, H. P., Paudel, K.C & et al. “Elements of Business Mathematics”,
Pinnacle Publication.

 

Page | 43

 
