—

Course Title: Database Management System (3 Cr.)
Course Code: CACS255

yYear/Semester: IVIV
Class Load: 6 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs, Tutorial: 1 Hr., Practical: 2 Hrs.)

Course Description Description
This course offers both theoretical as well as practical knowledge of database
management system so that students can handle back end of software while

developing any types of application packages.

Course Objectives Objectives
The general objectives of this subject are to provide the basic concept, theory and
practices in design and implementation of DBMS. Students will also be good for
handling different type of data transaction by using SQL commands.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Introduction to DBMS 3 Hrs.
Introduction of Database Management System, Objective of Database
Management System, Importance of DBMS, Merit and Demerit of DBMS.
Application of DBMS.

Unit 2 Database Design, Architecture and Model 6 Hrs.
Overview of The Database Designing Process and View of Data, Structure of
Database Management System, Level Database Architecture and Data
Independence, Database Languages: DDL, DML, QBE; Data Models:
Hierarchical, Network, Relational, E-R Model, Object Base Data Model; E-R
Diagram: Concepts, Relationship, Entity Relationship Diagram, Weak Entity
Sets, Strong Entity Set, Aggregation, Generalization, Converting ER Diagrams

to Tables.

Unit 3 Relational Database Model 4 प्राउ.
Structure of RDBMS and Terminology, Database Schema and Schema Diagram.

Keys: Super, Candidates, Primary, Foreign, Composite etc. and Relationship:
Introduction to Relational Algebra, Relational Algebra Operations: Select,
Project, Cartesian Product, Union, Set Difference, Natural Join, Outer Join.

Unit 4 Database Normalization 4 Hrs,
Definition and Importance of Normalization, Functional Dependencies.

Normalization: INF, 2NF, 3NF, BONF.and 4NF.

Unit 5 Creating and Altering Databise.and Tables(SQL) 6 Hrs.
Introduction to SQL, Creating Database with Different Type ofArguments and
Alter Database, Creating NormatTables and” Complexs;Tables with Different

७ “

   

 

a Page | 67

4
Scanned by CamScanner

 
Type of Constraints(Key, Check, Default), Alter Tables : Adding and Dropping
Attributes and Other Constraints; Drop Statement: Table, Database.

Unit 6 Manipulating and Querying Data 8 Hrs.
Adding Data with INSERT Statement, Retrieving Data with SELECT Statement
and FROM Clause and Filter Data with WHERE Clause; Order and Grouping
Data with ORDER and GROUP by Clause and Summarizing the Select
Statement; Retrieving Data from Different Tables using: INNER JOINS, OUTER
JOIN and CROSS JOIN; Building Nested Queries, Manipulate Data Using
UPDATE Statement and Removing Rows Using DELETE Statement; Creating
and Altering View.

Unit 7 Developing Stored Procedures, DML Triggers and indexing 5 Hrs.
Managing Stored Procedures, Create, Alter, Drop, Execute Stored Procedure
Encryption, Passing Data To Stored Procedures , Parameter Default. Returning
Data From Stored Procedure Output Parameter Using The Return Statement;
Transaction Flow, Creating Triggers, Triggers Limitation, Disabling Trigger.
Developing Multi Row Enabled Triggers; Basic Concept of Indexing,
Ordered Indices, Type of Indexing, Multiple Key Access, Creating And Dropping
Index.

Unit 8 Query Processing and Security 5 Hrs.
Overview of Query Processing, Measuring of Query Cost, Selection Operation,
Sorting, Joining Evaluation of Expression, Query Optimization; Database
Administrator: DBA Roles and Responsibilities, Database Security Issues,
Types of Security, Access Protection, User Accounts and Database Audits,
Discretionary Access Control, Mandatory Access Control; Data Encryption And
Decryptions.

 

Unit 9 Transaction and Concurrency Control 4 Hrs.
Transaction Concept, Simple Transaction Model, Atomicity and Durability,
Transaction Isolation, Serializability, Transaction Isolation and Atomicity and
Transaction Isolation Levels; Introduction, Lock-Based Protocol, Dead-Lock
Handling, Multiple Granularity, Time-Based Protocol.

Laboratory Works

Lab works should be done covering all the topics listed above using Oracle and a
small project work should be carried out using the concept learnt in this course.
Project should be assigned on Individual उती.

« ip ts

Teaching Methods « on

The general teaching pedagogy includes class legtures, group discussions, ‘case
studies, guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and

a.

  

il
Scanned by CamScanner

 
practical). and examinations (written and verbal), depending upon the nature of
the topics. The teaching faculty will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy
as per the need of the topics.

gyaluntion
External Assessment | Total
Practical | Total
20 त्र -
(3 Hrs.) | (3 Hrs.)
Text Book

1. Abraham Silberscatz, “Database System Concept”, 6" Edition, McGraw ea

 
  
  

  
           

Reference Books Books
1. Elmasri — Navathe, “/undamental of Database System™, 5" Edition, Pearson.
2. James R. Groff and Paul N. Weinberg, “The complete Reference SQL”. 39
Edition.
3. Jason Price, “Oracle Database 11g SQL”, McGraw Hill, 2007 4
4. Robert Vieria, “Microsoft SOL Server 2008 Programming”, Wiley India

 

 

Page | 69

 

Scanned by CamScanner
