 

Course Title: Numerical Methods (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS252

Year/Semester: II/IV

Class Load: 6 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs, Tutorial: 1, Practical: 2 Hrs.)

Course Description

This course covers solution of nonlinear equations, interpolation and
approximation, numerical differentiation and integration and solution of linear
algebraic equation, ordinary differential equations and partial differential
equations. It provides knowledge for numerical analysis.

Course Objectives
The general objectives of this subject are to make students familiar with the

theory of numerical analysis for solving algebraic and transcendental equations,
solution of ordinary and partial differential equations, numerical differentiation
and integration.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Solution of Nonlinear Equations 10 Hrs.
Introduction, Types of Equation, Errors in Computing. The Bisection Method;
The Method of False Position, Newton- Raphson Method, Solution of System of
Nonlinear Equation, Fixed Point Iteration and Convergence

Unit 2 Interpolation and Approximation 8 Hrs.
Introduction, Errors in Polynomial Interpolation, Lagrange's Polynomials,
Newton's Interpolation using Difference and Divided Differences, Cubic Spline
Interpolation, Least Squares Method for Linear and Non-linear Data.

Unit 3 Numerical Differentiation and Integration 5 Hrs.
Introduction to Numerical Differentiation, Newton's Differentiation Formulas,
Numerical Integration (Trapezoidal Rule, Simpson's 1/3 rule, 3/8 rule); Romberg
Integration; Numerical Double Integration.

Unit 4 Solution of Linear Algebraic Equations 10 Hrs.
Review of the existence of solutions and properties of matrices. Consistency of a
Linear System of Equations, Gaussian Elimination Method, Gauss-Jordan
Method, Inverse of matrix using Gauss Elimination Method, Method of
factorization, Iterative Methods(Jacobi & Gauss-Seidel  Iteration),Power
Method. हि

Unit 5 Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations 7 Hrs.
Introduction to Differential. Equations? Initial Value Problem, Taylor Series
Method, Picard's Method, Euler's Method and Its Accuracy, Heun's method,

Ao

Page 58
 

Runge-Kutta Methods, Solution of Higher Order Equations, Boundary Value
Problems, Shooting Method and Its Algorithm.

Unit 6 Solution of Partial Differential Equations 5 Hrs.
Introduction to Partial Differential Equations, Deriving Difference Equations,
Laplacian Equation and Poisson's Equation.

Laboratory Works
Laboratory works will consist of program development and testing of Non-linear
Equations, Interpolation, Numerical Differentiation and Integration, Linear
Algebraic Equations, Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations using C or
C++Builder.

Teaching Methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group discussions. case
studies. guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and
practical), and examinations (written and verbal), depending upon the nature of
the topics. The teaching faculty will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy
as per the need of the topics.

Internal Assessment External Assessment
20 20 60 100
(3 1115.) G Hrs.)
Text Books

1. C.F. Gerald and P.O. Wheatley, “Applied Numerical Analysis”, 4". Edition,
Addison Wesley Publishing Company, New York

2. S.S Sastry, “/ntroduction to Methods of Numerical Analysis’’,- Prentice- Hall
India

Evaluation

 
      

        

Reference Books 3

1. W. Cheney and D. Kinciad, “Numerical Mathematics. and Computing”, 2°4
edition, Brooks/Cole Publishing Co., 1985 5
W.H. Press, B.P. Flannery et. al., “Numerical Recipes in C’; 1° dition,

Cambridge Press, 1998. hh nee L of
i yr C/\

 

to

Page | 59

 
+

3. S. Yakwitz and F. Szidarovszky, “An Introduction to Numerical Computations”,
2™ Edition, Macmillan Publishing Co., New York.
4. S.S. Sastry. “Engineering Mathematics Volume two”, Prentice-Hall of India.

/
(A

 

Page | 60

FTEFERE EERE EERE EERE EER EEE

 
