Course Title: Software Project Management

Course Code: CACS407

Year/Semester: [V/VII

Class Load: 5 Hrs. /Week (Theory: 3Hrs, Practical: 2Hr.)

Course Description

This course provides the comprehensive knowledge about Software Project Management,
which encompasses with Software Project Planning, Scheduling, Cost Estimation, Risk
management, Quality management and Configuration management.

Objectives: The general objective of this course is to provide fundamental knowledge of
software project management and corresponding software tool.

Unit -1

Software Project Management Concepts 8 Hrs
Introduction, Project and Software project, Software project vs other project, Importance and
Problems in software project management, Process of SPM. Characteristics of good project
manager, Successful Software Project Manager, Overview of Software Project Planning.

Unit-2

Software Project Scheduling . 8Hrs
Objectives of activity planning, Work breakdown structure, Network planning model:

Critical path method (CPM), Program evaluation and review technique (PERT), Precedence
diagramming method (PDM), Shortening project duration, Identifying critical activities.
Forward pass and Backward pass

Unit -3

Software Estimation Techniques 7 Hrs
Software Effort Estimation: Problems with over and under estimations, Basis of software
Estimating, Software effort estimation techniques, expert Judgment, Estimating by analogy.
Bottoms-up estimating, Top-down approach and parametric models.

Unit -4 8 Hrs
Software Evaluation and Costing

Project Evaluation: Strategic Assessment, Technical Assessment, cost-benefit analysis, Cash
flow forecasting, cost-benefit evaluation techniques, Risk Evaluation. Selection of Appropriate
Report, Project approach: Choosing technologies, choice of process models, structured
methods.

Unit -5

Risk Management सस nels.
Risk Identification, Planning, Evaluation and Management, Categories of Risk, Framework for
dealing with risk, evaluating Risks to the schedule

    

Unit -6 भने
Software Quality Management दि
TQM, Six Sigma, Software Quality: defining and importance software quality ISO926, Place
of software quality in software planning.

Unit -7 . . € rs [ras

 

  

16
 

Software Configuration Management 7 Hrs
Concept, Requirement and Elements of SCM, Baseline, SCM Repository, Versioning and
version control, SCM Process, Change Control Process. Configuration Audit and Status
Reporting. Case Study: Version Control Software Tools (Git, CVS, SVN)

Laboratory Works
Laboratory works should be done covering all the topics listed above and a small work should
be carried out using the concept learnt in each unit in the group. Work should be assigned on

individual basis. Student may choose project Management tools like (MS Project, OpenProj,
dot Project, Trello, Asana, ClickUp).

Teaching Methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group discussions, case studies, guest
lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and practical), and
examinations (written and verbal), depending upon the nature of the topics. The teaching
faculty will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy as per the need of the topics

 

  
 

References
1. Cotterell, B. H. (2018). Software Project Management. McGraw-Hill Z
2. Dutt, S. C. (n.d.). Software Project Management. Pearson Education India.
3.

A.S. Kelkar (n.d.). Software Project Management. PHI Learning ररिषद्कहो।

pron #i

17
