काका BEEBE RBEESGBSBEGEEBEE ERE EERE SESE SE BS

Course ‘litle: C Programming (4 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS151

Year/Semester: I/II

Class Load: 8 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 4 Hrs, Tutorial: 1 Hr., Practical: 3 Hrs)

Course Description
This course includes both thcoretical as well as practical concept of

programming. Practical skill of programming are provided using C language
which includes basic concept of C, operators and expressions, basic input/output
function, control structures, array & string. function, pointer, structure and union,
file handling and graphics in C.

Course Objectives
The general objectives of this course are to provide fundamental concepts of
programming language, programming technique and program development using
C programming language.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Programming Language 10 Hrs.
Introduction to Programming Language, Types of Programming Language,
Language Processor, Program Errors, Features of Good Program, Different
Programming Paradigm, Software Development Model, Program Development
Life Cycle, System Design Tools.

Unit 2 Programming Technique 5 Hrs.
Introduction to Programming Technique, Top down & Bottom up Approach,
Cohesion and Coupling, Structured Programming, Deterministic and Non-
deterministic Technique, Iterative and Recursive Logic, Modular Designing &
Programming.

Unit 3 Basic Concept of C 5 Hrs.
Introduction, History, Features, Advantages and Disadvantages, Structure of C
program, Compiling Process, C Preprocessor and Header Files, Library Function,
Character Set, Comments, Tokens and its types, Data types, Escape Sequences,
Preprocessors Directives.

Unit 4 Operators and Expressions 3 Hrs.
Arithmetic Operator, Relational Opérator, Logical Operator, Assignment
Operator, Increment/decrement Opérator, Conditional Operator. Bitwise
Operator, Comma Operator, Sizeof Operator, Operator. Precedence and
Associativily, Expressions and_ its Ae” Casting in Expression,
Program Statement.

 

Page 24
 

Unit 5 Input and Output 3 Hrs.
Input/Output Operation, Formatted I/O (scanf, printf), Unformatted VO (getch-
putch, getche. getchar-putchar and gets-puts)

Unit 6 Control Structure 6 Hrs.
Introduction, Type of Control Structure (Branching:if, if else, if elseif and switch
case, Looping: while, do while and for and Jumping: goto, break and continue),
Nested Control Structure.

Unit 7 Array 6 Hrs.
Introduction, Declaration, Initialization, One Dimensional Array, Multi
Dimensional - Array, Sorting (Bubble, Selection), Searching Sequential), String
Handling.

Unit 8 User Defined Function 5 Hrs.
Introduction, Components, Function Parameters, Library Function ys. Users
Defined Function, Different Forms of Function, Recursion, Passing Array to
Function, Passing String to Function, Accessing a function (Call By Value & Call
By Reference), Macros, Storage Class.

 

Unit 9 Pointer 6 Hrs.
Introduction, ‘The Address(&) and Indirection(*) Operators, Declaration &
Initialization, Pointer to Pointer, Pointer Expressions, Pointer Arithmetic. Passing
Pointer to a Function, Pointer and Array, Array of Pointer, Pointer and String,
Dynamic Memory Allocation.

Unit 10Structure 5 Hrs.
Introduction, Declaration, Initialization, Nested Structure, Array of structure,
Array within Structure, Passing Structure & Array of Structure to function,
Structure & Pointer, Bit Fields, Union and Its Importance, Structure vs. Union,

Unit 11Data File Handling 4 Hrs.
Introduction, Types of File, Opening & Closing Data File, Read & Write
Function, Writing & Reading Data To and From Data File, Updating Data File,
Random Accessing Files, Printing a File.

Unit 12Introduction to Graphics 2 Hrs.
Initialization, Graphical Mode, Graphical Functions.

 

Laboratory Works
Laboratory works should be done covering all the topics listed above and a small project
work should be carried out using the concept ee in this cotrse only. Projeet should be
assigned on individual basis. 0:

[, Page | 25

 
Teaching Methods

The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group discussions, case studies,
guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and practical), and
examinations (written and verbal), depending upon the nature of the topics. The teaching
faculty will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy as per the need of the topics.

Evaluation

 

   
 

 
  

Exami

ination Scheme
20 20 60 100
(3 Irs.) (3 hrs.)
Text Books

1. Brain W. Kerighan & Dennis Ritchie, "The C Programming Language", Second
Edition, Prentice Hall, 1988. ISBN: 978-0131103627

2. Byrons S. Gotterfried, "Programming with C, 3/e", McGraw Hill Education India,
2013, ISBN: 978-0-07-014590-0

  
  
     

Reference Books

 

3. Al Kelley, Ira Pohl, "A Book on C", 4" Edition, Pearson Education, 1998, ISBN:
978-0201183993

4. Deitel & Deitel, “C: How to program’, 7" Edition, Pearson Education, 2012, ISBN:
9780273776840

5. E Balagurusamy, “Programming in ANSI C. Sixth Edition”, Tata Me GrawHill
2012 ISBN: 9781259004612

6. Yeshvant Kanetkar, "Let us C”, 13" Edition, BPB Publication,2013, ISBN: 978-81-
8333-163-0 ;

7. Ramesh Rimal & et. al., “Computer Science-II, Revised Edition”, Buddha Academic

013

७

 

Page | 26
