Tribhuvan University
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences
OFFICE OF THE DEAN 2019

 

Bachelor in Computer Applications Full Marks: 60

Course Title: Society & Technology Pass Marks: 24
Code No: CASO 102 Time?3 hours
Semester: 1° QS
Centre: Symbol No:
Candidates are required to answer the questions in their own words as Fax asypossible.
9
Group A
Attempt all the questions. [10x1 = 10]
1. Circle (O) the correct answer. ;
i) The father of Sociology is
a) Talcott Parson SS b) Max weber

c) Karl Marx & d) August Comte

ii) Which of the following is notfrue?
a) Sociology is the scientific study-of society.
> SS
b) Sociology is the Katisti€ihtly of human culture.
c) Sociology is Aaeiree science.

d) Sociology\contribites in social policy formulation and social planning.
iii) What arBngQeho two schools of thought related to scope of sociology?
a\SEgimalistic school and Synthetic school of thought

SN aritica and specialist school of thought
c)’ Formalistic and critical school of thought
d) American and British school of thought

iv) Which of the following is not a unit of social life?
a) Association b) Organization

c) Group d) Social Conflict

If you need notes of BCA all semester please visit our site www.bcanotesnepal.com
v) One's father's brother is one's

a) Fictive kin b) Affinal kin
c) Consanguineal kin d) All of the above

vi) The process by which individuals learn the culture of their society is known as

a) Acculturation b) Assimilation
c) Enculturation d) Accommodation

vii) What is the process by which a society transmits its values to individuals so thatthey*can

function properly as its member? WS
a) Personalization b) Internalizatid
c) Socialization d) Generalizations

viii) Which of the following is not true? WS ©

a) Techno-culture is diffused to fulfill the human negds;

b) Cultural appropriateness based innovations are Giftused-from one place to another easily.
c) Technology is often diffused from develofiing areas to developed ones.

d) Cultural diffusion is the universakgoch proces’.

ix) Sociology traditionally relies mainLy-on

a) Quantitative data eS b) Historical data

c) Qualitative data d) All of the above

(-

x) Which one of the following can-be placed under the category of ascribed status?

XU
a) Caste OY b) Class
\

c) An engirieée S d) Social reformer

WS
Ss

Y

If you need notes of BCA all semester please visit our site www.bcanotesnepal.com
Tribhuvan University
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences
OFFICE OF THE DEAN 2019

 

Bachelor in Computer Applications Full Marks: 60
Course Title: Society & Technology Pass Marks: 24
Code No: CASO 102 Time: 3 hours

Semester: 1°¢

aN

Candidates are required to answer the questions in their own words as far‘as-possib

_ CS

Attempt any SIX questions. om S [6x5 = 30]

—
Cc

le.

2. How does Formalistic school of thought differ from Synthetic scheoLof thought?
3. Write an essay on ' relevance of sociology in computer application’.

4. Discuss the influence of modern technology in chat inant relationship.
5

. What do you understand by society? How does \it-differfrom community? Discuss with

examples. Ye Q
6. What is marriage and what are the various types of marriage? Describe with examples.

7. What do you understand by social stratification? Discuss caste-based stratification in

Nepalese society?
8. Write Short Notes on gal
a) ssiaton YES

b) Focus Group\Disctission method in social research
QY o,
c) Quantitativexesearch
SY

Aciempany TWO questions. [2x10 = 20]

Group C

9. What do you understand by National Integration? What are the major dimensions of

National Integration? Discuss.

10. 'A greater proportion of an individual's personality is a reflection of the type of

socialization process he or she has gone through during primary socialization’. Explain.

11. Discuss the major data collection tools and techniques used in social research.

If you need notes of BCA all semester please visit our site www.bcanotesnepal.com
