 

Course Title: English II (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS103

Year/Semester: I/II

Class Load: 4 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs., Tutorial: 1 Hr.)

Course Description

The course consists of literary reading, business communication skills along with critical °
reasoning to inculcate cognitive ability and workplace communicative competence in the
students. It consists of science fiction stories, business writing and exercises based on
critical reasoning. The course aims to enhance language proficiency and stimulate
creative and critical thinking and analysis.

Course Objectives
The course has following specific objectives:
० To impart reading skills in students and make them comprehend and analyze
literary texts.

¢ To frame students’ logical capability including analyzing reasoning, assessing
credibility, making sound decisions and solving dilemmas.

* To help students to develop confidence and expertise in composing effective
professional documents.

Course Contents

Unitl Science Fiction Stories 10 Hrs.
1. II. G. Wells: “The Land Ironclads”
2. Jack Williamson: “The Metal Man”
3. Brian Aldiss: “Who can Replace a Man?”
4. J. G. Ballard: “Billenium”
5. William Gibson: “Burning Chrome”
Unit2 Business Communication 9 Hrs.
1. Rules of Good Writing
2. Fax Message and Electronic Mails

Memos, Reports and Meetings

Unit3 Persuasive Communication 3 Hrs.
1. Notices, Advertisements and Leaflets

 

Unit4 Oral Communication 3 Hrs.
1. Oral Presentation Skills th
UnitS Critical Reasoning i 20 Hrs.

1. Analyzing Reasoning
2. Evaluating Reasoning

 
3. Reasoning Implications
4. Evaluating Evidence and Authorities
5. Two Skills in the Use of Language

6. Exercising the skills of Reasoning
7. Constructing Reasoning

Teaching Methods

The course expects students’ effective participation and instructors’ proper guidance to
fulfill the objectives of the course. The teacher should engage students in language
activities and minimize lectures. Student centered teaching method will engage students
in the pursuit of learning and bring about positive results.

Evaluation

Internal Evaluation: 40%
Attendance - 5
Presentation/classroom participation- 5
Writing sample- 15
Mid-term test- 15
Final Evaluation: 60%
Critical response on stories
Business writing tasks
Logical reasoning activities

Text Books

I. Shippey, Tom. The Oxford Book of Science Fiction Stories. London: OUP, 2003.
2. Taylor, Shirley. Communication Jor Business: A Practical Approach. London:
Longman, 2005. A

Thompson, Anne. Critical Reasoningy A Practical Introduction. New York:
Rutledge, 2009. Or . हँ

Ly 10
a ८

ue

Page | 31

 
