Tribhuvan University
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences
OFFICE OF THE DEAN 2019

 

Bachelor in Computer Applications Full Marks: 60
Course Title: English I Pass Marks: 24
Code No: CAEN 103 Time: 3 hours

Semester: 1°*

Centre: Symbol No:

Candidates are required to answer the questions in their own words as far as possible.

Group A
Attempt all the questions. [10x1 = 10]
4. Circle (O) the correct answer.

i) Icon is defined as ...............
a) visual symbol used in a menu instead of natural language.
b) a device moved by hand to indicate position on the screen.
c) data programs
d) The set of software
ii) An....... pen is one example of an input device.
a) electron b) electronic c) electronics d) electronically

iii) The word computational has ...................

a) an adjective-forming suffix b) adverb-forming suffix
c) verb-forming suffix d) noun-forming suffix

iv) Newest is an example of ................

a) superlative adjective b) comparative adjective
c) absolute adjective d) absolute adverb
ए) ४/८ ७०९ ...........- to document our program.
a) instructor b) instructed c) instruct d) instruction

If you need notes all semester Related of BCA www.bcanotesnepal.com
vi) The opposite meaning of 'preventing' is ..............

a) co-operating b) enabling c) reducing d)
vii) Which of the following words has a destructive meaning?
a) cipher b) shield c) smart-card ‘ocalizing d) hacker
viii) The computer is ............ faster than the old one.
a) considered b) considerably c) considerable d) considering
ix) Our company is working on anew .......... of software products.
a) generation b) generative c) generated d) generate
x) The similar meaning (synonym) of the word inventive is ..............00..
a) Skilled b) creative c) awkward d) insufficient

If you need notes all semester Related of BCA www.bcanotesnepal.com
Tribhuvan University
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences
OFFICE OF THE DEAN 2019

 

Bachelor in Computer Applications Full Marks: 60
Course Title: English I Pass Marks: 24
Code No: CAEN 103 Time: 3 hours

Semester: 1°*

Candidates are required to answer the questions in their own words as far as possible.

Group B

Attempt any SIX questions. [6x5 = 30]

5. What are the major functions of the decision support system? Explain.

6. How has the micro-chip technology changed the world forever? Illustrate.

7. Give the meaning of "network of networks" and then explain the main use of ALGOL.

8. Give some specific names of clipboard computers now available in the market and then
explain the two different jobs of 'infector' and ‘detonator’.

9. Why did the developers of the PAL system invent interlaced video? What are its advantages
and disadvantages? Explain.

10. "Computers are about to take people to places they have never been able to visit before."
Explain the statement basing on the essay 'Fancy a fantasy Spacecraft?’

11. Discuss some of tasks/jobs suited to robots only, and show the impact of robotics revolution

felt in modern society.
Group C
Attempt any TWO questions. [2x10 = 20]

12. Perhaps you manage a computing specializing in multi-media hardware and software.
Prepare a leaflet to inform companies of the potential benefits of using multimedia.
OR
Write a letter of inquiry to a college or university requesting information about a degree

program. Be specific in your request, and follow the criteria for writing letters of inquiry.

If you need notes all semester Related of BCA www.bcanotesnepal.com
13.

14.

You work in the purchasing department of an industry where a major project is being
introduced at work. Employees working under your supervision need suggestion from you.
Write a memo providing your response in regard to their individual responsibilities.

OR
Write a complete CV of your own to be sent with the covering letter while applying for a job.
Write an essay about a problem that directly involves you. Choose a problem you see in your

neighborhood, your college, or your job, and explain how it should be solved.

If you need notes all semester Related of BCA www.bcanotesnepal.com
