Tribhuvan University
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences
OFFICE OF THE DEAN 2019

 

Bachelor in Computer Applications Full Marks: 60
Course Title: Society & Technology Pass Marks: 24
Code No: CASO 102 Time: 3 hours

Semester: 1°*

Centre: Symbol No:

Candidates are required to answer the questions in their own words as far as possible.

Group A
Attempt all the questions. [10x1 = 10]
1. Circle (O) the correct answer.
1) The father of Sociology is
a) Talcott Parson b) Max weber
c) Karl Marx d) August Comte

ii) Which of the following is not true?
a) Sociology is the scientific study of society.
b) Sociology is the holistic study of human culture.
c) Sociology is a value-free science.

d) Sociology contributes in social policy formulation and social planning.
iii) What are the major two schools of thought related to scope of sociology?
a) Formalistic school and Synthetic school of thought

b) Critical and specialist school of thought
c) Formalistic and critical school of thought
d) American and British school of thought

iv) Which of the following is not a unit of social life?
a) Association b) Organization

c) Group d) Social Conflict

lf you need notes of BCA all semester please visit our site www.bcanotesnepal.com
v) One's father's brother is one's

a) Fictive kin b) Affinal kin
c) Consanguineal kin d) All of the above

vi) The process by which individuals learn the culture of their society is known as

a) Acculturation b) Assimilation
c) Enculturation d) Accommodation
vii) What is the process by which a society transmits its values to individuals so that they can

function properly as its member?

a) Personalization b) Internalization
c) Socialization d) Generalization

viii) Which of the following is not true?
a) Techno-culture is diffused to fulfill the human needs.
b) Cultural appropriateness based innovations are diffused from one place to another easily.
c) Technology is often diffused from developing areas to developed ones.
d) Cultural diffusion is the universal social process.
ix) Sociology traditionally relies mainly on

a) Quantitative data b) Historical data
c) Qualitative data d) All of the above

x) Which one of the following can be placed under the category of ascribed status?

a) Caste b) Class

c) An engineer d) Social reformer

lf you need notes of BCA all semester please visit our site www.bcanotesnepal.com
Tribhuvan University
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences
OFFICE OF THE DEAN 2019

 

Bachelor in Computer Applications Full Marks: 60
Course Title: Society & Technology Pass Marks: 24
Code No: CASO 102 Time: 3 hours

Semester: 1°*

Candidates are required to answer the questions in their own words as far as possible.

Group B
Attempt any SIX questions. [6x5 = 30]
How does Formalistic school of thought differ from Synthetic school of thought?
Write an essay on ' relevance of sociology in computer application’.

Discuss the influence of modern technology in changing family relationship.

पा मे 9 "२

What do you understand by society? How does it differ from community? Discuss with

examples.

6. What is marriage and what are the various types of marriage? Describe with examples.

7. What do you understand by social stratification? Discuss caste-based stratification in
Nepalese society?

8. Write Short Notes on any two:

a) Assimilation

b) Focus Group Discussion method in social research

c) Quantitative research

Group C
Attempt any TWO questions. [2x10 = 20]

9. What do you understand by National Integration? What are the major dimensions of

National Integration? Discuss.

10. 'A greater proportion of an individual's personality is a reflection of the type of

socialization process he or she has gone through during primary socialization’. Explain.

11. Discuss the major data collection tools and techniques used in social research.

If you need notes of BCA all semester please visit our site www.bcanotesnepal.com
