Course Title: Database Administration

Course Code: CACS405

Year/Semester: [V/VII

Class Load: 6 Hrs. /Week (Theory: 3Hrs, Practical 3Hrs.)

Course Description

This course provides the comprehensive knowledge aboutrelational database management
system in administrative approach to integrate in enterprise levelof database in network
environment which encompasses with oracle databaselnstances Management, database
installment in network environment, implementing user role and privileges, multitenant database
management, back and recovery.

Objectives: The general objectives of this course is to provide core knowledge of administrative
works on relational database management system.

Unit 1Introduction to an Oracle databasel2Hrs

Overview of the Oracle Database Architecture (process, memory, storage structure), DBA roles
and responsibilities, Familiar with SQL*Plus,Accepting Values at Runtime, Overview of SQL
Command (DDL (Tables, Constraints, IndexesViews, Synonyms, SequencesPartitioning and
Materialized Views), DML, Join and Subquery)

Unit2 Managing Database Instances5Hrs

Oracle Database installation, Database creation,starting up and shutting down oracle instance,
Oracle Network component, communicating between Databases; Using Dynamic Performance
Views, Using the Automatic Diagnostic Repository (ADR), Using the Alert Log and Trace Files,
Managing Initialization Parameter Files.

Unit 3: Tablespace and Storage management 4Hrs
Working with Tablespaces and Data Files, Creating and adding tablespace and
datafiles,Managing Control Files, Online Redo Logsand Archive logs;Multiplexing online redo
logs and control files, database archiving.

Unit -4Managing Users, Roles and Privileges 6Hrs

Assigning Quotas to Users, Applying the Principal of Least Privilege, Creating and Assigning
Profiles, Administering User Authentication Methods, Managing Oracle Database Users,
Privileges, and Roles.

Unit 5: Multitenant Database Architecture 7 Hrs
Understanding the Multitenant Architecture, Pluggable Architecture; Creating CDB; Creating
Pluggable Databases (PDBs) within a CDB; Manage CDBs and PDBs, Backup and Duplicate,
Manage Security in Multitenant databases

Unit-6Configure the Oracle Network Environment5Hrs

Overview of Network Configuration, Oracle Net Listener Configuration and Management,
Oracle Net Naming Methods, Networking the Net Configuration Assistant, Configure Client
Connections with Net Manager, View Listener Configuration, Start and Stop the Oracle Listener,
Use TNSPING to Test Oracle Net Connectivity, Connect to the Database, Configure NetServices
with Enterprise Manager

  
 

Unit -7:Backup and RecoveryS5Hrs

Backup and Recovery Concepts, Database backup, restoration and recovery, defining a
backupand recovery strategy, Backup and Recovery options; Data Dump; User-Managed Backup
and Recovery; Configuring RMAN; RMAN Backups, Restore and Recovery, Perform CDB and
PDB flashback.

Unit-8

Automate Tasks with the Scheduler4Hrs

Introduction to the Scheduler, Access Rights, Scheduler Components and Workflow, create a
Job, Job Classes, Use Time Based, Event-Based Schedules, Create an Event-Based Schedule.

Laboratory Works
Laboratory works should be done covering all the topics listed above and a small work should be

carried out using the concept learnt in each unit in the group. Work should be assigned on
individual basis.

Teaching Methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group discussions, case studies, guest

lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and practical), and examinations
(written and verbal), depending upon the nature of the topics. The teaching faculty will
determine the choice of teaching pedagogy as per the need of the topics.

References
|. Fernandez, I. Beginning Oracle Database 12c Administration. Apress.
2. Press, O. Oracle Database 19 C: Administration Workshop vol-I/II.
3. Thomas, B. Oracle Database 12C Administration Certified Associate. Sybex.
4. Pro Oracle Database 18c Administration: Manage and Safeguard Your Organization’s
Data, Michelle Malcher and Darl Kuhn, Third Edition
5. Oracle Database 12c DBA Handbook, Manage a Scalable4 Secure Oracle Enterprise

Database Environment, Bob Bryla
pre!

 
