Course Title: Network Administration (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS406

Year/Semester: [V/VII

Class Load: 6 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3Hrs. Practical: 3 Hrs.)

Course Description: The course introduces the theoretical as well as practical concepts of
Network Administration. The course includes concepts of work station, server and services,
Network infrastructure, Implementing different network services.

Course Objectives: The objectives of this course is to make the students to design and
implement enterprise level network with its services.

Course Contents:

Unit I: Introduction [4Hrs.]
Network administrator as a Profession, Network administrator professional ethics,
Recent trends in network administration.

Unit I: Work Station, Server and Services [16Hrs.]
Workstation: Architecture design, Hardware strategies, OS installation. Servers:
Hardware Strategies, Hardware Features & Specifications. Service: Requirements,
Planning and Engineering, Service Launch, Disaster Recovery.

Unit I: Infrastructure [6Hrs.]
Network Architecture, Network Operations, Datacentres Overview and Running
Datacentres.

Unit III: Service Recommendation [16Hrs.]

Server Upgrade, centralizing a service, Service Monitoring, Namespaces, Email
Service, Print Services, Data Storage, Backup and Restore, Software Repository, Web
Services.

Unit IV: [6Hrs.]
Preparing procurement plan/document for enterprise level network setup

Laboratory Works:
The laboratory work includes implementation of the mentioned content in syllabus using
LINUX and Windows operating system.

Teaching Methods
The major teaching methods that can be followed for this course includes class lectures,
laboratory activity, group discussions, presentations and case studies.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Evaluation
Examination Scheme
Internal Assessment External Assessment Total
Theo Practical Theo Practical
20 20 (3 Hrs. 60 3 Hrs. fe
Text Book:

1. The Practice of System and network administration, 3"! Edition, Thomas A. Limoncelli,
Christina J. Hogan, Strata R. Chalup

2. Mastering Windows Server 2019: The complete guide for IT professionals to install
and manage Windows Server 2019 and deploy new capabilities, 2nd Edition

3. Ubuntu and Centos Linux server administration, MD. Tanvir Rahman. 20198 रड

8 a
Aya) Gls v

 

   
