WETTER eeeeeeeeeerre

Course Title: Financial Accounting (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS152

Year/Semester: I/II

Class Load: 5 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs, Tutorial: 1 Hr., Practical: 1 Hr.)

Course Description
This course includes both theoretical as well as practical concept of financial

accounting so that students can understand working principle of financial
accounting and hence can use the concept in developing application related to
financial sector.

Course Objectives
The general objective of this course is to develop conceptual understanding of the
fundamentals of financial accounting system.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Theoretical Framework 4 Hrs.
Meaning and Scope of Accounting: Meaning of Accounting, Procedural
Aspects of Accounting, Evolution of Accounting as a Social Science, Objectives
of Accounting, Functions of Accounting, Sub-fields of Accounting, Users of
Accounting Information, Relationship of Accounting with Other Disciplines,
Limitation of Accounting, Role of Accountant in the Society.
Accounting Concepts, Principles and Conventions: Accounting Concepts.
Principles & Conventions — an Overview, Qualitative Characteristics of Financial
Statements, Fundamentals Accounting Assumptions.
Accounting Standards: Concepts, Objectives, Benefits & An Overview of
Nepal Accounting Standards
Accounting Policies: Meaning, Selection of Accounting Policies and Changes in
Accounting Policies

Unit 2 Accounting Process 10 Hrs.
Books Of Accounts Leading to The Preparation of Trial Balance, Journal Entries,
Double Entry System, Advantage of Double Entry System, Concepts of
Transaction and Events, Classification of Accounts, Golden Rules of
Accounting, Advantages of Journal, Ledger, Trial Balance, Subsidiary Books
Including Cash Books, Capital and Revenue Expenditures 110 Receipts.
Contingent Assets and Contingent Liabilities, Errors Including Rectifications
Thereof.

Unit 3 Bank Reconciliation Statement ० 4 Hrs.
Introductions, Ascertaining the Causes of Differences of Bank Balance in Bank.
Column of the Cash-Book and in Pass- Book, Procedure for Reconciling the

Cash- Book Balance with the  Pass-Book Balance, Importance sof Bank
a

Reconciliation Statement. 4 Aye ॥ /
( 27

Page |
FREETTEEEEEERRREEEEER EEE

Unit 4 Depreciation Accounting 4 Hrs.
Concepts of Depreciation, Objectives for Providing Depreciation, Methods for
Providing Depreciation, Accounting for Depreciation

Unit 5 Inventories 4 Hrs.
Meaning, Basis and lechnique of Inventory Valuation, Inventory Recording °
System, Stock Taking

Unit 6 Preparation of Final Accounts for Sole Proprietors 10 Hrs.
Concept of Closing Entries in respect of Trading and Profit & Loss Account,
Concept of Accrual Basis of Accounting, Matching Concept and Dual Aspecis,
Concept on Manufacturing Account, Preparation of Balance Sheet, Arrangement
and Classification of Assets and Liabilities

Unit 7 Introduction to Company Accounts 9 Hrs.
Meaning of Company, Salient Features of Company, Types of Company,
Preparation of Financial Statements, Share Capital and its types, Debentures
and its types, Distinction between Debentures and Shares, Issue of Shares and
Debentures, Redemption of Preference Shares

Laboratory Works

Laboratory works should be carried out using any accounting packages (such as
Tally, Fact etc.) to implement the concepts discussed in the above mentioned
topics.

Teaching Methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group discussions, case
studies, guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and
practical), tutorials and examinations (written and verbal), depending upon the
nature of the topics. The teaching faculty will determine the choice of teaching
pedagogy as per the need of the topics.

Evaluation

   
   
  
  

  

Examination Scheme

Internal Assessment External Assessment
“
20 20 60 100

(3 Hrs.) (3 Hrs.)

 
  
 

   

  

Pi |)

/
४ Page | 28
 

Text Book
\ndrew Thomas & Anne Marie Ward. “Jntroduction to Financial Accounting 7/¢
Me Graw Hill 2012 ISBN: 9780077132682

 

 

Reference Books
Narayanaswamy, R., “Financial Accounting: A Managerial Perspective”, Prentice
Hall of India, New Delhi.

2. Porter, Gary A. Norton, Curtis L., “Financial Accounting: The Impact on Decision
Makers”, The Dryden Press, USA.

 

Page | 29
