Course Title: Mathematies I (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS154

Year/Semester: I/II

Class Load: 5 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs, Tutorial: 1 Hr., Practical: 1 Hrs)

Course Description

This course includes the topics from calculus and computational methods such as
limits and continuity, differentiation & its applications. integration and its
applications, differential equation and different computational techniques which
are essential as mathematical foundation for computing.

Course Objectives
This course makes students able to cognize the concept Calculus, Computational
methods and their applications in the areca of Social Science and Computer
Application.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Limits and Continuity 6 Hrs.
Limit of a function, Indeterminate forms. Algebraic properties of limit (without
proof), Theorems on Limits of Algebraic and Transcendental Function.
Continuity of a function, types of discontinuity. Exercises on evaluation of limits
and test of continuity. (Methematica)

Unit 2 Differentiation 6 Hrs.
Ordered Pairs, Cartesian Product, Relation, Domain and Range of a Relation,
Inverse of a Relation; Types of Relations: Reflective, Symmetric, Transitive, and
Equivalence Relations. Definition of Function, Domain and Range of a Function,
Inverse function, Special Functions (Identity, Constant), Algebraic (Linear,
Quadratic, Cubic), Trigonometric and Their Graphs. Definition of Exponential
and Logarithmic functions, Composite Function. (Mathematica)

Unit 3 Application of Differentiation 8 Hrs.
The derivatives and slope of the curve; Increasing and decreasing function;
convexity of curves; maximization and minimization of a function:
Differentiation and marginal analysis; price and output; Competitive equilibrium
of firm, Iltustrations. Drawing graphs of algebraic function by using first and
second order derivatives. (Mathematica)

Unit 4 Integration and Its Applications 8 Hrs,
Riemann Integral; Fundamental Theorem (Without Proof): Technique of
Integration; Evaluation and Approximation of Definite Intégrals: Improper
Integrals; Applications of Definite Integrals; Quadrate, Rectification: Volume and
Surface Integral. Trapezoidal and Simpson’s Rules ० Numerical
Integration.(Mathematica) Mo | र

/ )“4ु, ।४ /
Cn Page | 32

 
TWEEFEFFEFEEEEEEETETEE

Unit 5 Differential Equations 7 Urs.
Differential Equation and its Order and Degree, Differential Equations of First
Order and First Degree; Differential Fquations with Separable Variables,
Homogeneous and Exact Differential Equations.

Unit 6 Computational Method 10 Hrs.
Linear Programming Problem (LPP). Graphical Solution of LPP in Two
Variables, Solution of LPP by Simplex Method (up to 3 variables), Solution of
System of Linear Equations by Gauss Elimination Method, Gauss Seidel Method
and Matrix Inversion Method, Bisection method, Newton- Raphson Method for
Solving Non-linear Equations. (Excel/Matlab)

Laboratory Works
Mathematica and/ or Matlab should be used for above mentioned topics.

Teaching Methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group works, case studies,
guest lectures, research work. project work, assignments (theoretical and
practical), tutorials and examinations (written and verbal). The teaching faculty
will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy as per the need of the topics.

Evaluation

 
 
 

= Scheme

[es
(3 Hrs.) (3 Hrs.)
Text Book

1. Thomas, G, B, Finney, R. S., “Calculus with Analytic Geometry”, Addison -
Wesley, 9" Edition.

  
 

External Assessment

   
 

   
    

Reference Books

1. Monga, G. S., “Mathematics for Management and Economics”. Vikas Publishing
Ilouse Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi. <i

2. Upadhayay, H. P., Paudel, K.C & et al, “Elements of Business Mathematics”.
Pinnacle Publication.

Budnick, F. S., “Applied Mathematics for Business. Economics, and the Social

Sciences”, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Lim A /
भे Wa
/ WA
& ( 9 ay Page | 33

ब्‌ PFN
(८

eo

 

 
   
  
 
 
  
   

6.

Paudel, K. C., GC. F. B.. and et al, “Higher Secondary Mathematics”, Asmita
Publication & Distributors Pvt. Ltd. Nepal.
Bajracharya D. R., Shreshtha, R. M. & et al,
Pustak Bhawan, Nepal

Sthapit, A.B., Bajracharya, P. M. and et al, “Fundamentals of Business
Mathematics”, Buddha Academic Publisheres & Distributors Pvt, Ltd., Nepal
Yamane, T. “Mathematics for Economist’, Prentice-hall of India.

Snedden. I., “Elements of Partial Differential Equation”
McGraw.

“Basic Mathematics I. IP’. Sukunda

» Hill Book Company-

ci

 

Page | 34
