Course Title: Microprocessor and Computer Architecture (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS155

Year/Semester: I/II

Class Load: 6 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs, Tutorial: 1 Hr., Practical: 2 Hrs.)

Course Description
This course is an introduction to microprocessor and computer architecture. It
covers topics in both the physical design of the computer (organization) and the
logical design of the computer (architecture).

Course Objectives

The course has following specific objectives:

¢ To explain the microprocessor.

० To explain the assembly language programming,

¢ To explain the overview of computer organization,
¢ To explain the principle of CPU system.

¢ To explain the principle of memory system

० To explain the principle of data flow,

Course Contents

Unit 1 Fundamental of Microprocessor 5 Hrs.
Introduction to Microprocessors, Microprocessor systems with bus organization,
Microprocessor architecture and operation, 8085 Microprocessor and_ its
operation, 8085 instruction cycle, machine cycle, T states, Addressing modes
in 8085, Introduction to 8086.

Unit 2 Introduction To Assembly Language Programming 10 Hrs.
Assembly Language Programming Basics, Classification of Instructions and
Addressing Mode, 8085 Instruction Sets. Assembling, Executing and Debugging
the Programs, Developing Counters and Time Delay Routines, Interfacing
Concepts

Unit 3 Basic Computer Architecture 4 Hrs.
Introduction: History of computer architecture, Overview of computer
organization, Memory Hierarchy and cache, Organization of hard disk.
Instruction Codes: Stored Program Organization-Indirect Address, Computer
Registers, Common bus system, Instruction set, liming and Control-Instruction
Cycle

Unit 4 Microprogrammed Control | 10 Hrs.
Basic Computer Design of Accurtulator: Control of AC Register, ALU
Organization; Control Memory-Address Sequencing: Conditional Branching,
Mapping of —_Instruction-Subroutines: Micro Program: Symbolic Micro

A ५४ 58 10
/\ ४ Page | 35

Y

 
 

Program, Binary Micro Program; Design of Control Unit: Basic Requirement of
Control Unit, Structure of Control Unit, Micro Program Sequencer.

Unit 5 Central Processing Unit 10 Hrs,
General Register Organization: Control Word, Stack Organization and
Instruction: Formats-Addressing Modes.

Data Transfer and Manipulation: Data Transfer Instructions, Data
Manipulation Instructions, Arithmetic __ Instructions, Logical 10 Bit
Manipulation Instructions, Shift Instructions.

Program Control: Status Bit Conditions, Conditional Branch Instructions,
Subroutine Call and Return, Program Interrupt, Types of Interrupts

Unit 6 Pipeline, Vector Processing and Multiprocessors 6 Hrs.
Parallel Processing, Pipeline Examples: Four Segment Instruction Pipeline, Data
Dependency, Handling of Branch Instructions; Vector Processing: Vector
operations, Matrix Multiplication;

Laboratory Works
8085 Assembly Language program
1. Multi byte Addition & Subtraction, Multi byte decimal addition & subtraction.
2. Adder and substractor circuit.
3. Study of 8259 programmable interrupt controller - Development of interrupt
service routine.
4. Keyboard/display controller - Keyboard scan - blinking and rolling display.
. Parallel data transfer
6. Study of Microcomputer development system.

an

Teaching methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class Icctures, group works, case studies,
guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and
practical), tutorials and examinations (written and verbal). The teaching faculty
will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy as per the need of the topics.

Internal Assessment
20 20 60
(3 Hrs.) (3 Hrs.)

Evaluation

  
 

 
  
     

। "/ Page | 36
टु Book

I. Morris Mano.M., Computer System architecture, PIII.

Reference Books

 

1. Hamacher.V.C.,Vranesic.Z.G 1910 Zaky.S.G., “Computer
McGraw Hill, New York.
2. Hayes."Computer System Architecture",Mc Graw Hill.

a oh

Organisation”,

Page | 37

 
