Course Title: Computer Networking (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS303

Year/Semester: III/V

Class Load: 5 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3Hrs. Practical: 2 Hrs.)
Course Description

This course offers detailed concept and structure of networking standards and principles. It
includes introduction, functioning and significance of Physical Layer, Data Link Layer, Network
Layer, Transport Layer, Application layer and some security mechanisms. It does not entirely
focus on theoretical concept but also strongly focuses on practical skill based learning.

Course objectives

The general objectives of this course are to provide theoretical as well as practical knowledge of
computer networking to make students capable of implementing, managing and troubleshooting
the issues of computer network in their personal as well professional life.

Course Contents

Unit 1: Introduction 6 Hrs.
1.1 Network as an infrastructure for data communication
1.2 Applications of Computer network
1.3 Network Architecture
1.4 Types of computer Networks
1.5 Protocols and Standards
1.6 The OSI Reference Model
1.7 The TCP/IP Protocol Suite
1.8 Comparison between OSI and TCP/IP Reference model
1.9 Critiques of OSI and TCP/IP Reference model
Unit 2: The Physical Layer 6 Hrs.
2.1 Functions of Physical Layer
2.2 Data and Signals: Analog and Digital signals, Transmission
Impairment, Data Rate Limits, Performance
2.3 Data Transmission Media: Guided Media, Unguided Media and
Satellites
2.4 Bandwidth Utilization: Multiplexing and Spreading
2.5 Switching: Circuit switching, Message switching & Packet
switching
2.6 Telephone, Mobile and Cable network for data Communication
Unit 3: The Data Link Layer 8 Hrs.
3.1 Functions of Data Link Layer
3.2 Data Link Control: Framing, Flow and Error Control
3.3 Error Detection and Correction
3.4 High-Level Data Link Control(HDLC) & Point — to - Point
protocol(PPP)
3.5 Channel Ee

  

X
= hx 1
By BOS fe
%» £
3.6 Multiple Access: Radom Access(ALOHA, CSMA, CSMA/CD,
CSMA/CA), Controlled Access(Reservation, Polling, Token
Passing), Channelization(FDMA, TDMA, CDMA)
3.7 Wired LAN: Ethernet Standards and FDDI
3.8 Wireless LAN: IEEE 802.11x and Bluetooth Standards
3.9 Token Bus, Token Ring and Virtual LAN
Unit 4: The Network Layer 8 Hrs.
4.1 Functions of Network Layer
4.2 Virtual circuits and Datagram Subnets
4.3 IPv4 Addresses: Address Space, Notations, Classful addressing,
Classless addressing, Subnetting and Network Address
Translation(NAT)
4.4 IPv4 Datagram format and fragmentation
4.5 IPv6 Address Structure and advantages over IPv4
4.6 Routing Algorithms: Distance Vector Routing, Link State Routing
4.7 Internet Control Protocols: ARP, RARP, ICMP
4.8 Routing protocols: OSPF, BGP, Unicast, Multicast and Broadcast
Unit 5: The Transport Layer 7 Hrs.
5.1 Functions of Transport Layer
5.2 Elements of Transport Protocols: Addressing, Establishing and
Releasing Connection, Flow Control & Buffering, Error Control,
Multiplexing & Demultiplexing, Crash Recovery
5.3 User Datagram Protocol(UDP): User Datagram, UDP Operations,
Uses of UDP, RPC
5.4 Principles of Reliable Data Transfer: Building a Reliable Data
Transfer Protocol, Pipelined Reliable Data Transfer Protocol, Go-
Back-N(GBN), Selective Repeat(SR)
5.5 Transmission Control Protocol(TCP): TCP Services, TCP Features,
TCP Segment Header
5.6 Principle of Congestion Control
Unit 6: The Application Layer
6.1 Functions of Application layer
6.2 Application Layer Protocols: DNS, DHCP, WWW, HTTP, HTTPs,
TELNET, FTP, SMTP, POP, IMAP
6.3 Concept of traffic analyzer: MRTG, PRTG, SNMP, Packet tracer,
Wireshark.
Unit 7: Network Security
7.1 A Model for Network Security
7.2 Principles of cryptography: Symmetric Key and Public Key
7.3 Public Key Algorithm — RSA
7.4 Digital Signature Algorithm
7.5 Communication Security: IPSec, VPN, Firewalls, Wireless
Security.

5 Hrs.

5 Hrs.

 
Practical

AWRY

Ie
8.

9

Prepare hardware and software specification for basic computer system.

Determine the appropriate placement of networking devices on a network.

Identify networking cable standards. Create and test cross — over and straight cables.
Configure the IP address of the computer.

Create a basic network and share file and folders.

Install and configure windows server: Active Directory, User and Group Policy
Management.

Set the file access permissions and quota in windows server.

Configure basic DNS and DHCP services in windows server.

Install Linux based OS and practice on basic Linux and networking commands.

10. Configure IP address and subnet in Linux Machine.

11. Install packet tracer and identify the features of packet tracer.

12. Implement the LAN topologies.

13. Demonstrate the use of VLAN.

14. Implement the both static and dynamic router configurations.

15. Install and configure DNS, DHCP, FTP and Web Servers in Linux machine.
16. Capture some packets and analyze the header using Wireshark.

17. Implement the firewall.

Teaching Methods

The teaching faculties are expected to create env

topics listed in the syllabus. Th

and verbal examinations.

 

 

 

 

 

Evaluation
Examination Scheme
Internal Assessment External Assessment Total
[__ Theory | | Practical । 110 Practical
| 20 | | 20@3Hrs.) | 60(3715.) ee

 

 

 

Reference Book

I.

N

Andrew S. Tanenbaum, David J. Wetherall, "Computer Networks, 5/e", Prentice Hall,

2011.
Behrouz A. Forouzan, "Data Communications and networking” Tata McGraw-Hill.

Kurose, Ross, "Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach", Pearson Education

Limited, 2017.

Larry L. Peterson and Bruce S. Davie, "Computer Network: A System Approach", Morgan

Kaufmann, 5/e, 2012.
Matthew Helmke, Andrew Hudson, Paul Hudson "Ubuntu’ Unleashe
Covering | 8.04; 18.10, 19.04", 13/e, SAMS _ Pearson Education, ¥8 WA 2७

3 é

      
  

पण

 

  

गरु १9 0 १
9, &
mente, करे “सु

विवि. बी ven Saks :

कीर्तिपुर

ironment where students can update and upgrade
themselves with the current scenario of computing and information technology with the help of
e general teaching pedagogy that can be followed by teaching
faculties for this course includes class lectures, laboratory activity, group discussions, case studies,
guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (Theoretical and Practical), and written

019 Edition_
