Course Title: Introduction to Management (3 cr.)
Course code: CAMG 304

Year/Semester: III /V

Class load: 3 Hrs./Week (Theory: 3Hrs)

Course Objectives
This course aims to impart the basic management knowledge, and skills to the students so as to

enhance their managerial capabilities and enable them to apply in the practical field.

Course Description

This course contains Introduction to Management, perspectives in management thought, emerging
issues and challenges in management, management functions like planning, leading, controlling,
organizational change and development, communication, emerging issues in quality management,
technology and management.

Course Contents
Unit 1: Introduction LH4
Management: concepts, meaning and functions. Types of managers. Managerial roles and

skills. Organization and management. Changing perspectives of organization.

Unit 2: Perspectives in Management LH7
Classical Perspective: scientific management, administrative management and bureaucracy.
Behavioral Perspective: Hawthorne studies, human relations movement, and emergence of
organizational behavior. Quantitative Perspective: management science and operations
management. Integrating perspectives: systems and contingency perspectives. Emerging

management issues and challenges.

Unit 3: Planning and decision making LH7
Concept of planning, Levels of Planning: Strategic, Tactical and operational. Steps in
Planning. Tools for planning. Decision Making: meaning, types and process. Decision

making conditions — certainty, risk and uncertainty.

Unit 4: Organizing LH9

Concept of organizing, process and principles of organizing. Organization Architecture:
vertical differentiation — tall versus flat hierarchies, horizontal differentiation —

functional
structure, multidivisional structure, geographic structure, and matrix structure. Authority:

 
and Devolution: meaning, reasons, advantages and disadvantages. Staffing: concept and

importance.
Unit 5: Leading and communication
Concept and qualities of leadership. Transformational and transactional leadership,

Leadership Styles: autocratic, democratic, and participative. Concept of managerial ethics.
process, and

LH7

Motivation: concept, importance, and techniques. Communication: meaning,

networks. Types of communication, Barriers to effective communication.

Unit 6: Controlling and total quality management LH5

Concept, purpose, Process and types of controls. Essentials of effective control systems.
Control tools and techniques. Quality: Concept and importance. Total Quality Management:
concept, components, principles, tools and techniques. Emerging issues in quality

management.

Unit 7: Organizational Change and Development LH5
Concept and nature, forces, paradigm shifts and areas (structure, technology, business

process and behaviors) of organizational change. Resistance to change. Overcoming

resistance to change. Concept of Organizational Development

Unit 8: Technology, Organization and Management LH4
Concept of technology, approaches to technology and organization, social networking, use

of technology in people management,

References

Charles W.L. Hill and Steven L. McShane, Principles of Management, Tata Mc-Graw-Hill
Company, New Delhi.

Griffin, Ricky W., Management. AITBS Publishers and Distributors, New Delhi.

Hitt, M.A., J.S. Black and Porter, L.W., Management, Pearson Education, New Delhi

Laurie J. M. Management and organizational Behaviour, Pearson, New Delhi

Evaluation:
Internal Assessment: 40 marks
External Assessment: 60 marks

Total: 100 marks
Teaching methods: The major teaching methods include the case analysis, project work, term

paper, assignments, and quiz. The instructor decides the learning strategies based on the nature of

session/class.

  
