Course Title: MIS and E-Business

Course Code: CACS301

Year/Semester: HI/V

Class Load: 5Hrs. /Week (Theory: 3Hrs, Practical 2Hrs.)

Course Description
This course provides the fundamental knowledge of Management Information System and E-
Business and its associated infrastructure, security and protection issues, payment system and

ultimately live implementation of any web application in Web server.

Objectives: The general objectives of this course is to know fundamental knowledge of

MIS/E-Business and implement the web application in Web Server.

Unit 1:

Introduction to E-Commerce: Definitions and Concepts; Defining E-Business; Pure Versus
Partial EC; EC Framework, Classification of EC; Benefits of E-Commerce; Electronic
Markets; Role of Internet and Web in E-Commerce; The Limitations and Barriers of EC; Social
Networks and Social Network Services; M-Commerce: Concept, Scope, Attributes, Benefits;
Location-based l-commerce, l-Commerce Infrastructure, Location-Based Services and
Applications. 7LH

Unit 2:

The Network Infrastructure for E-Commerce: Introduction to Information Superhighway
(I-Way), Components of the I-Way, Internet as a network infrastructure. Wireless Application
Protocol: Wireless Application Protocol (WAP); Architecture of WAP; Working of WAP:
Wireless Technologies: ADSL, WiMAX, WLAN, WMAN Wi-Fi. UMTS (3G), LTE (4G). (5G
NR). Security Issues related to Wireless Communications. 8LH

Unit 3: Introduction to Management Information System: Data, information, computer
based information system (CBIS), Information System Resources, Management information
system, Transaction processing (TPS) system, decision support system (DSS), and executive
information system (EIS), SCM, CRMS and International Systems: Introduction, Supply
Chain Management Systems, Customer Relationships Management Systems, enterprise
systems and Challenges of Enterprise Systems Implementations- Managing the
implementation, International Information Systems-Outsourcing and off-shoring. 8LH

Unit 4: E-Commerce Security and Fraud Issues and Protections: Basic EC Security

Terminology, The Threats, ,Attacks, and Attackers, EC Security Requirements:

Confidentiality, Integrigusg Us ¢

 
 

Availability, Authentication, Authorization and
पि \attack: Viruses, Worms, and Trojan Horses, Heartbleed.

’ locker, Page hijacking, Botnets. Malvertising,
ch i ie attack: Social Phishing, Pharming, Identity

Nonrepudiation; Technical

[Dis bulted Deni cw hi

s Se ; Ansoin are, sniffing;

% ae,

ona

डिनको ‘
क्त.

त्रि

  
  

  

  

 
 
Theft and Identify Fraud, Spam Attacks; EC defense Strategy: access control(Authorization
and Authentication, Biometric Systems), encryption and PKI (Symmetric Key Encryption,
Asymmetric Key Encryption, Certificate Authority(CA), Secure Socket Layer (SSL). Securing

e-commerce networks: Firewalls, Virtual Private Networks, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS),

intrusion prevention System (IPS). 10LH

Unit 5: E-payment systems:

Online payment cards (credit cards, charge cards, debit cards, smart cards), processing cards
in online, credit card payment procedure, e-micropayments, e-checking and its processing in
online. Automated clearing house (ACH) network, mobile payments (Digital wallet), mobile
payment participants and issues, international payments, emerging EC payment systems and
issues: crypto currency, virtual currency. A case study of emerging trends in online payment

system in Nepal. 6 LH

Unit 6: Launching a Successful EC Website:
Planning Online Businesses (Business Plan, The cost-benefit, risk elements of a business case,
funding a New Online Business, EC Model selection), The process of building a website, basic
hierarchical website structure, website hosting and obtaining a domain name (cPanel
management, upload EC site to the web Server), web content creation and management: (Web
content, Categories and Types of Content, Content Management and Maintenance, Catalog
Content and its Management), Website design criteria, Site Map and Navigation, Web page
layout grid, Colors and Graphics, Website Usability, Performance, Website Promotion,
implementation of Payments system, Website Promotion, Search Engine Optimization (SEO).
10LH

Laboratory Works: 32LH
Laboratory works should be done covering all the topics listed above and a project work
should be carried out by individually implementing a fully functioning e-commerce web

application along with payment system.

Text Book
Efraim Turban, D. K. (2018). Electronic Commerce:A Managerial and Social Networks Perspective.
New York: Springer
References Book
Chaffey, D. (2009). E-Business and E-Commerce Management: Strategy,
Practice (4th Edition). Harlow: Prentice Hall.
Kalakota, A. B. (1996). Frontiers of Electronic Commerce. Pearson.
Kenneth C. Laudon, C. G. (2014). E-commerce: business. tech
Education Limited.
Kenneth C. Laudon, J. Yer (20
FIRM. New Yorgs

Implementation and

nology.society. New York: Pearson

   

). Management Information System: MANAGING THE DIGITAL
Urs lucation Limited, .

    
