Course Title: Advanced Java Programming (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS354

Year/Semester: III/VI

Class Load: 6 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs., Practical: 3 Hrs.)

Course Description:
This course covers advanced features of Java programming language including, GUI programming,
database programming, JavaBeans, JSP, Servlet, and Remote Method Invocation (RMI).

Course Objectives:
The primary objective of this course is to provide concepts of advanced features of Java

programming and make students familiar with their uses and applications.

Course Contents:

Unit 1: GUI Programming (12 Hrs.)

Introducing Swing; Creating a Frame; Displaying Information in a Component; Working with 2D
Shapes; Using Color; Using Special Fonts for Text; Displaying Images; Event Handling: Event
Handling Basics, Event Classes, Event Listeners and Adapter Classes; Swing and the MVC Design
Pattern; Layout Management; Basic Swing Components

Unit 2: Database Programming (7 Hrs.)
The Design of JDBC: JDBC Driver Types and Typical Uses of JDBC; the Structured Query
Language; JDBC Configuration; Working with JDBC Statements; Query Execution; Scrollable and

Updatable Result Sets; Row Sets

Unit 3: JavaBeans (7 Hrs.)
What Is a Java Bean? Advantages of Java Beans; Introspection; Properties, Events, and Methods
Design Patterns; Using BeanInfo Interface; Bound and Constrained Properties; Persistence;

Customizers; the Java Beans API; Writing JavaBeans

Unit 4: Servlets and JSP (14 Hrs.)

Background; The Life Cycle of a Servlet; A Simple Servlet; The Servlet API; The javax.servlet
Package; Reading Servlet Parameters; The javax.servlet.http Package; Handling HTTP Requests and
Responses; Using Cookies; Session Tracking; Introduction to JSP; Using JSP; Comparing JSP with

Servlet; Java Web Frameworks

Unit 5: RMI (5 Hrs.)

What is RMI? The Roles of Client and Server; Remote Method Calls; Stubs and Parameter
Marshalling; the RMI Programming Model; Interfaces and Implementations; the RMI Registry;
Parameters and Return Values in Remote Methods; Remote Object Activation; Simple Client/Server
Application using RMI; Comparing RMI with CORBA

Laboratory Work: The laboratory work includes writing Java programs
¢ To create GUI applications using swing, event handling, and layout management
० To create applications to work with databases ,
e To create JavaBeans

   
 

¢ To create server side web programs using Servlet and JSP
¢ Tocreate distributed applications using RMI

Text Books: ;
1. Core java Volume I — Fundamentals, Tenth Edition, Cary S. Horstmann, Prentice Hall

2. Core java Volume II — Advanced Features, Tenth Edition, Cary §. Horstmann, Prentice Hall
3. Java: The Complete Reference, 10", Herbert Schildt, McGraw-Hill

Reference Books:

I. Advanced Java Programming, Uttam K. Roy, Oxford University Press

2. Java: Advanced Features and Programming Techniques, Nathan Clark

Teaching Methods:

The teaching faculties are expected to create environment where students can update and upgrade
themselves with the current scenario of computing and information technology with the help of
topics listed in the syllabus. The general teaching pedagogy that can be followed by tcaching
faculties for this course includes class lectures, laboratory activity, group discussions, case studies,
guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (Theoretical and Practical), and written and
verbal examinations.

Evaluation:

 

| Internal Assessment Format [FM = 20] — Subject Teacher

 

Term Examination

 

Assignment | Attendance | Total

 

Mid-Term | Pre-Final
5 5 | 5 [5 20

Practical Assessment Format [FM = 20] — External Examiner will be assigned by Dean Office,

FOHSS.

 

 

 

 

 

। 2204] Viva | Lab Reports | Total
10 छ 3 20

Note: Assignment may be subject specific case study, seminar paper preparation, report writing, project work, research
work, presentation, problem solving etc.

 

Final Examination Questions Format [FM = 60, Time = 3 Hrs.]

 

 

Number of
| ° ed Total Marks

SN | Question Type Questions Question
Group —'A'

Objective Type Questions (Multiple
Choice Questions) = sd [Ox 1= 16
Attempt all the questions.

Group —'B'

Short Questions (Attempt any SIX
questions.)

Group —'C'

Long Questions (Attempt any TWO
questions.)

   
  

 

 

uo

 

 

 
