TFERFRERP REFEREE REREEEES EEE EES

Course Title: Software Engineering (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS253

Ycear/Semester: II/IV

Class Load: 4 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs, Tutorial: 1)

Course Description
This course includes the topics that provide fundamental concept and standard of

software engineering so that students will be able to develop software and/or
handle software project using the global standard of software.

Course Objectives
This Course is designed to provide the students with the basic competencies

required to identify requirements, documents the system design and maintain a
developed system. It presumes a general understanding of computers and
programming which are covered in the first and second semester of the degree.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Introduction 4 Hrs.
= of Software, Type of Software, Characteristic of Software, Attributes
of Good Software, Definition of Software Engineering. Software Engineering
Costs, Key Challenges that Software Engineering Facing, System Engineering
and Software Engineering, Professional Practice.

Unit 2 Software Development Process Model 8 Hrs,
Sofiware Process, Software Process Model: The Waterfall Model, Evolutionary
Development, Component-Based Software Engineering (CBSE); Process
Iteration: Incremental Delivery, Spiral Development; Rapid Software
Development: Agile Methods, Extreme Programming, Rapid Application
Development. Software Prototyping; Rational Unified Process (RUP), Computer
Aided Software Engineering (CASE): Overview of CASE Approach,
Classification of CASE tools.

Unit 3 Software Requirement Analysis and Specification 10 Hrs.
System and Software Requirements, Type of Software Requirements: Functional
and Non-Functional Requirements, Domain Requirements, User Requirements;
Elicitation-and Analysis of Requirements: Overview of Techniques, View Points,
Interviewing, Scenarios, Use-Case, Ethnography, Requirement Validation,
Requirement Specification, Feasibility.

Unit 4 Software Design . 10 hrs.
Design Concept: Abstraction, Architecture, Patterns, Modularity: Cohesion,
Coupling; Information Hiding, . Functional Independence, ; Refinement;
Architectural Design: Repository Model, Client Server Model, Layered Model,

Modular Decomposition: Va Using Structured ,Methods, User
: 0070 4,

  

Page | 61
Interface Design: Human-Computer Interaction, Information Presentation,
Interface Evaluation; Design Notation.

Unit 5 Coding 2 Hrs.
Programming Language and Development Tools, Selecting Languages and
‘Tools, Good Programming Practices

Unit 6 Software Testing and Quality Assurance 6 Hrs.
Verification and Validation, Techniques of Testing: Black-box and White-box
‘Testing, Inspections: Level of Testing: Unit Testing, Integration Testing,
Interface Testing, System Testing, Alpha and Beta Testing. Regression Testing;
Design of Test Cases, Quality Management Activities, Product and Process
Quality. Standards: 1S09000, Capability Maturity Model (CMM);

Unit 7 Software Maintenance 3 Hrs.
Evolving Nature of Software, Different Types of Maintenance: Fault Repair,
Software Adaptation, Functionality Addition or Modification; Maintenance
Prediction, Re-Enginecring, Configuration Management (CM): Importance of
CM, Configuration Items, Versioning;

Unit 8 Managing Software Projects 2 Hrs.
Needs for the Proper Management of Software Projects, Management Activities:
Project Planning, Estimating Costs, Project Scheduling, Risk Management,
Managing People;

Teaching Methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class lectures, group discussions, case

studies, guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theoretical and
practical), and examinations (written and verbal), depending upon the nature of
the topics. The teaching faculty will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy
as per the need of the topics.

Evaluation

        
 
   

Examination Scheme

Internal Assessment External Assessment
गी”
40 00. 100
(3115

   
    

Page | 62

Se त
Se ON
000
छ
—_—>
=
ae
