Course Title: Computer Fumdamentals and Applications (4 Cr.)
Course Code: CACS101

Year/Semester: I/I

Class Load: 8 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 4 Hrs., Practical: 4 Hrs.)

Course Description

This course offers fundamental concepts of computer and computing which
includes introduction to computer system, computer software & database
management system, operating system, data communication & computer network
and contemporary technologics. It also aims at helping students convert
theoretical concept into practical skill through the use of different application
packages including word processor, spreadsheet package, presentation package
and photo editing graphical package.

Course Objectives
The general objectives of this course are to provide fundamental concepts of
information and communication technology and to make students capable of
using different application packages in their personal as well as professional life.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Introduction to Computer System 16 Hrs.
Introduction to Computer, Characteristics of Computer, Applications of
Computer, Classification of Computer, Mobile Computing, Anatomy of a Digital
Computer, Computer Architecture, Memory & Its Classification, Input devices,
Output Devices, Interfaces.

Unit 2 Computer Software 3 Hrs.

Introduction to Software, Types of Software, Program vs. Software, Computer
Virus and Antivirus.

Unit 3 Operating System 4 Hrs.

Introduction to Operating System, Function of Operating System, Types of
Operating System, Open Source Operating System.

Unit 4 Database Management System 8 Hrs.

Introduction to DBMS, Database Models, SQL, Database Design and Data
Security, Data Warehouse, Data Mining, Database Administrator

Unit 5 Data Communication and Computer Network 10 Hrs.
Introduction to communication system, Mode of Communication, Introduction to
Computer Network, “ypes of Computer Network, LAN Topologies,
Transmission Media, Network Devices, OSI Reference Model, Communication
Protocols, Centralized vs. “Boe d Sys

/
» NV Page |7

   

 
Unit 6 Internet and WWW 6 Hrs.
Internet: Introduction to Internet and its Applications, Connecting to the
Internet, Client/Server Technology, Internet as a Clicnt/Server Technology,
Email, Video-Conferencing, Internet Service Providers, Domain Name Server,
Internet Address, Internet Protocols (IP, TCP, HTTP. FIP, SMTP, POP, Telnet,
Gopher, WAIS), Introduction to Intranet, Internet vs. Intranet vs. Extranet,
Advantages & Disadvantages of Intranct
World Wide Web (WWW): World Wide Web and Its Evolution, Architecture
of Web, Uniform Resource Locator (URL),Browsers: Internet Explorer, Netscape
Navigator, Opera, Firefox, Chrome, Mozilla; Search Engine. Web Servers:
Apache, IIS; Proxy Server; HTTP Protocol, FTP protocol.

Unit 7 Contemporary Technologies 13 Hrs.
Multimedia, e-Commerce, e-Learning, e-Governance, e- Banking, Hypermedia,
Geographical Information System, Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality, Artificial
Intelligence, Ambient Intelligence, Robotics, Bit Coin.

Laboratory Works
Laboratory works should cover all the units and topics mentioned below and a project

work should be carried out by students individually implementing the concept and skill
learnt in this course.

Unit 1 Operating System 10 Hrs.
a. GUI Based OS (5 Hrs.): Interface, GUI vs. CUI, Introduction to Windows,
Features, Elements of Windows, Task Bar, Using Menus and Submenus,
Opening a Program, Opening Multiple Program, Using Short Cuts, Using My
Computer, Switching off the System, Desktop and Custom Wall Papers,
Screen Saver, Using Help for Interactive Learning. Using General
Accessories: Notepad, Paint Tool, Clip Board, Character Map, Calculator
etc.; Using Multimedia: Using CD/DVD/BD, Using Audio/Video; Using
Explorer to Manage Files and Folders: Copy/Delete/Rename/Short Cuts;
Recycle Bin and It Uses. Using Format, Scandisk and Disk Defragmenter,
Windows Installation and Setting.
b. CUI Based OS (5 Ilrs.): Introduction to DOS, DOS Internal Commands,
DOS External Commands.

Unit 2 Word Processor 12 Hrs,
Introduction to Word Processor, 4 atures of Word Processor, Elements of Word
Window, Creating & Saving Document, Copy Paste and Cut Paste, Format
Painter, Undo and Redo, Print Preview,.Printing Documents, Fonts, Effect and
Character Formatting, Paragraph Formaiting, Styles, Finding, Replacing and
Selection, Cover Page, Blank Page, Page Break. Working with Table, Inserting
Picture, Clip Art, Shapes,.Smart Art and Chart, Hyperlink, Bookmarks, Cross-

 

/
/

८७६ १ JX
he SK Page | 8

 

 
Referencing, Header, Footer, Page Number, Working with Text Box, Quick
Parts, Word Art, Drop Cap. Signature Line, Date & Time, Object. Equation,
Symbol, Working with Themes, Page Margins, Page Orientation, Page Size,
Columns Handling, Hyphenation, Watermark, Page Color, Page Borders.
Indentation, Arranging Objects, Table of Contents, Footnote and Endnote,
Citation and Bibliography. Captions. Inserting Index, Table of Authorities,
Mail Merge, Spelling and Grammar, Thesaurus, Translation, Word Count,
Comments, Tracking, Changes, Compare. Protecting Document, Document
Views, Ruler, Gridlines, Document Map, Thumbnails, Zooming, Window
Handling, Creating and Using Macro.

Unit 3 Spreadsheet Package 12 Hrs.
Introduction to Spreadsheet Package, Features of Spreadsheet Package,
Introduction to Microsoft Excel, Elements of Excel Window, Cell Referencing
in Excel: Relative, Absolute, and Mixed: Managing Workbooks, Worksheets,
Windows, Working with Worksheet, Printing Worksheet, — Using
Formulas/functions; Formatting/Conditional Formatting Data & worksheet;
Using Paste Special, Essential Worksheet Functions, Using Templates,
Protecting the File and Worksheet with Passwords; Working with Graphic
Objects: Clip Art, Word Art, Map: Working with Charts, Working with
Internal Database, Getting More Power from Worksheet Databases, Accessing
External Databases, Loan Amortization Scheduling and Calculation; Data
Validation, Consolidating and Outlining, Using What- if Analysis: Data Table,
Goal Seek, Scenario Manager; Understanding Pivot Tables, Constructing and
Analyzing Pivot Tables, Using Custom Controls on Worksheets, Effectively
Using the Macro Recorder

Unit 4 Presentation Package 6 Hrs.
Introduction, Creating and Saving Presentation: Entering, Editing, and Enhancing
Text; Editing in different views- Outline View, Slide Sorter View: Creating
Graphs, Editing and Enhancing Graphs: Adding ClipArt in Slide, Editing Arts,
Animating Charts and Art Objects, Adding Sound, Choosing Sound Effects-
Transitional, From Other Sources; Adding Sounds to Animations and Sound
Objects; Recording Sound and Narration: Adding Movie in Slides, Playing and
Editing Movie; Making Movie Poster and Icon: Slide Show, Setting Slide
Transition, Speed and Slide Advancement; Rehearsing Slide Display Timing,
Slide Notes and Comments: Editing Text Color, Creating Custom Color;
Background and Schemes; Linking and Embedding Objects; Importing and
Exporting Presentation; Printing Slides and Handouts

Unit 5 Photo Editing Package © A 20 Hrs.
Fundamentals
Graphics Basics: Bitmap Vs. Vector-Based Graphics, Color/Bit Depth and Image
Resolution, Graphic File Formats, Optimizing Web Graphics, Regular Text’ Vs.

Bee Ny “Page | 9
— UY
१4 हर

 

 
Anti- Aliased Text, Pixel Resize Vs. Smart Resize, Regular Graphics Vs.
Interlaced Graphics, Lossy Compression Vs. Lossless Compression, Dithered
Graphics Vs. Non-Dithered Graphics, Standard Sclection Vs. F loating Sclection,
Tolerance, Opacity.

Introduction to Color: Color Modes- RGB, CMYK, Grayscale, LAB, Bitmap;
Hue, Saturation, and Brightness; Browser Safe Colors; Shadows, Ilighlights and
Midtones of an Image.

Interface, Tools and Options

Environment: About Photoshop, The Photoshop Interface, Setting up a new
Photoshop document. Saving a new document, The Default Palettes. Working
with Photoshop Palettes, The Photoshop Toolbox and Options bar, Using Guides
and Ruler,

Image and Color Basics: Supported import and export image formats, Opening
an Image in Photoshop, Creating Images In Photoshop, Saving Images In
Photoshop, Basic Image Editing, Changing Image Size, Cropping an Image,
Changing Color/Bit Depth, Optimizing Images using Save for Web, Working
with Color in Photoshop

Tools; Parts of the Toolbox, Toolbox Shortcuts, Tools Options, Marquees,
Magic wand, Lassos, Move tool, Crop tool. Slice tools, Pencil, Paintbrush,
Eraser tools, History brushes, Clone tamp-Pattern stamp, Healing brush tool,
Retouch tool, Gradient, Paint bucket. Burn-Dodge-Sponge, Blur-Sharpen-
Smudge, Shapes-line- rectangle-polygon-custom shapes, Path selection tool, Pen
tool, Type tools, Notes tool-Audio annotation, Eyedropper-Color sampler-
Measure tool, Hand-Zoom, Quick mask-Screen modes, Jump to Image Ready,
Back ground and Foreground.

Transforms: Using Free transform, Move, Rotate, Scale, Skew, Distort,
Perspective, Flip-vertical, horizontal, Invert, Rotate 180°, Rotate 90° CW,
Rotate 90° CCW,.

Layers, Channels and Actions

Photoshop Layers: About Layers-Fill and Adjustment Layers, The Layer Palette,

Naming Layers, Creating Layers, Deleting Layers, Viewing Layers, Moving

Layers, Layer Opacity, Locking Layers, Merging Layers, Layer Modes and

Blending Options, Image Composting Using Layers.

Photoshop Channels: About Channels, The Channel Palette, Creating and

Viewing Channels, Modifying Channels, Deleting Channels, Alpha Channels and

Masks.

Actions: Using the Action?Palettes Recording Action, Playing Action, Editing

Action, Loading a Saved Action. “

Restoring and Enhancing Images

Restoration of Photos: Restoring Damaged Photos, Photo Retouching,
we र नट 7

 

(/ Page | 10

 
Photo Enhancement and Color Correction: Changing Levels, Changing Curves,
Color Balance, Changing Brightness and Contrast, Changing Hue Saturation and
Brightness, Changing a Grayscale Image to a Colored Image, Histogram,
Gradient Map, Desatuarate, Invert, Color Replace, Selective Color, Equalize,
Threshold, Channel Mixer, Posterize, Changing Background using Layer
Composting

Text Editing and Special Effects

Text Editing in PhotoShop: About the Type Layer, Creating Vertical and
Horizontal Types, Point and Paragraph Text Creation, Using Horizontal and
Vertical Type Mask Tools, Using Character Palette for Text Editing, Choosing
a Font, Changing the Type Color, Choosing a Type Size, Specifying Kerning and
Tracking, Using Fractional Character Widths, Specifying Baseline Shift,
Applying Underline and Strikethrough, Text Alignment and Justification,
Specifying Anti-Aliasing, Creating Text Warp, Rasterizing Type, Converting
‘ype to Shapes, Adding Effects to Text

Photoshop Special Effects and Filters: About Special Effects, Using Filters,
Basic Filter Examples, Artistic Filters, Distorting Filters, Filter Combinations,
Plug-in Filters.

Web Application and Animation

Adobe ImageReady: About Image Ready, Opening Image Ready, The Image
Ready Interface, Image Maps, Image Slicing, Basic Animation.

Photoshop for Building Web Interface: About the Interface

Teaching Methods

The teaching faculties are expected to create environment where students can
update and upgrade themselves with the current scenario of computing and
information technology with the help of topics listed in the syllabus. The general
teaching pedagogy that can be followed by teaching faculties for this course
includes class lectures, group discussions, case studies, guest lectures, research
work, project work, assignments (theoretical and practical), and written and
verbal examinations.

Evaluation
Examination Scheme

Internal Assessment External Assessment

20 20 60 100
(3 Hrs.) (3 Hrs.)

WoO

fr J
८

 

  
   

         
   

Page | 11

 
Text Books

NR

1

i)

Alexis Leon, Mathews Leon, “Fundamentals of Information Technology, 2/e”,
Vikas Publishing House Pvt Limited, 2009. ISBN: 9788182092457

E Balagurusamy, “Fundamentals of Computers,” Tata McGraw Hill Education
PVT.Ltd., 2009, ISBN: 9780070141605

Peter Norton's, “Jntroduction to Computers”, 7" Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill,
2010, ISBN: 9780070671201

Reference Books

Brad Dayley & DaNae Dayley, “Adobe Photoshop CS6 Bible”, Wiley Publishing Inc.,
2012, ISBN: 978-1-118-12388-1

Faithe Wempen, “Microsoft Office Power Point 2007 Bible (With CD)”, Wiley
Publishing Inc., 2007, ISBN: 978-0470043684

Herb Tyson, “Microsoft Office Word 2007 Bible (With CD)”, Wiley Publishing
Inc., 2007 .

Jim Boyce, “Windows 7 Bible ”, Wiley Publishing Inc., 2009, ISBN: 978-
0470509098

John Walkenbach, “Microsoft Office Excel 2007 Bible (With CD)”, Wiley
Publishing Inc., 2007, ISBN: 978-0470044032

Pradeep Sinha and Priti Sinha, “Computer Fundamentals (with CD)”, 6"
Edition, BPB Publications, 2003, ISBN: 9788176567527

Ramesh Rimal & et. al., “Computer Science-l, Revised Edition”, Buddha
Academic Publishers and Distributors Pvt. Ltd. Nepal. 2013

Ramesh Rimal & et. al., “Computer Science-II, Revised Edition”, Buddha
Academic Publishers and Distributors Pvt. Ltd. Nepal, 2013

(Av

 

Page | 12
