Tribhuvan University
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences

 

OFFICE OF THE DEAN 2019
Bachelor in Computer Applications Full Marks: 60
Course Title: English I Pass Marks: 24
Code No: CAEN 103 Time:-3 hours
Semester: 1°
(a,
Centre: SymibolNo:

Candidates are required to answer the questions in their own words as far as.possible.

Y)

NS
Group A

Attempt all the questions. [10x1 = 10]
4. Circle (O) the correct answer. ;
i) Icon is defined as ............... W
oN
a) visual symbol used in a menu nee Cane tural language.
b) a device moved by hand to inginibeone on the screen.
c) data programs &
d) The set of ane
ii) An....... pen “eS of an input device.
a) electron b) electronic c) electronics d) electronically
. WN. 2
iii) The word computational has ...... cece eee eee
a) an adj eedvertorming suffix b) adverb-forming suffix
RN forming suffix d) noun-forming suffix
iv) Newest is an example of ................
a) superlative adjective b) comparative adjective
c) absolute adjective d) absolute adverb
v) We were ............ to document our program.
a) instructor b) instructed Cc) instruct d) instruction

If you need notes all semester Related of BCA www.bcanotesnepal.com
vi) The opposite meaning of ‘preventing’ is ..............
a) co-operating b) enabling c) reducing d)

vii) Which of the following words has a destructive meaning?
localizing d) hacker

a) cipher b) shield c) smart-card
viii) The computer is ............ faster than the old one.
a) considered b) considerably c) considerable d) considering
ix) Our company is working on anew .......... of software products.
a) generation b) generative c) generated d) sere
x) The similar meaning (synonym) of the word inventive is .............. i.

(
a) Skilled b) creative c) awkward \ neon
Oy

If you need notes all semester Related of BCA www.bcanotesnepal.com
Tribhuvan University
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences
OFFICE OF THE DEAN 2019

 

Bachelor in Computer Applications Full Marks: 60
Course Title: English I Pass. Marks: 24
Code No: CAEN 103

~
Time: 3.hours
t XY?
Semester: 1°

Candidates are required to answer the questions in their own words as(far asypossible.

9
Group B
Attempt any SIX questions. S [6x5 = 30]

. What are the major functions of the decision support-system? Explain.

5

6. How has the micro-chip technology changed the-world forever? Illustrate.

7. Give the meaning of "network of networks" and. thenyexplain the main use of ALGOL.

8. Give some specific names of clipboard S3faputers/how available in the market and then
explain the two different jobs of infe@ioNandetonator’.

9. Why did the developers of the PAT Sysan invent interlaced video? What are its advantages
and disadvantages? Explain: S

10. "Computers are akout.to take people to places they have never been able to visit before."
Explain the statement basin on the essay ‘Fancy a fantasy Spacecraft?’.

11. Discuss some ef tasks/j jobs suited to robots only, and show the impact of robotics revolution

felt in mod’ Sts Ney.
“SS

Group C
Acsen gan TWO questions. [2x10 = 20]

12. Perhaps you manage a computing specializing in multi-media hardware and software.
Prepare a leaflet to inform companies of the potential benefits of using multimedia.
OR
Write a letter of inquiry to a college or university requesting information about a degree

program. Be specific in your request, and follow the criteria for writing letters of inquiry.

If you need notes all semester Related of BCA www.bcanotesnepal.com
13. You work in the purchasing department of an industry where a major project is being
introduced at work. Employees working under your supervision need suggestion from you.
Write a memo providing your response in regard to their individual responsibilities.

OR
Write a complete CV of your own to be sent with the covering letter while applying for a job.

14. Write an essay about a problem that directly involves you. Choose a problem you see in your

neighborhood, your college, or your job, and explain how it should be solved. &

If you need notes all semester Related of BCA www.bcanotesnepal.com
