Course Title: Mathematics I (3 Ce)

Course Code: CACS104

Year/Semester; I/I

Class Load: 5 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs., Tutorial: 1 Hr., Practical: 1 Hr.)

   

Course Description
This course includes several topics from algebra and analytical geometry such |
set theory and real & complex number; relation, functions and graphs; sequence
and series; matrices and determinants: permutation & combination; conic section

and vector in space which are essential as mathematical foundation for
computing.

Course Objectives
The general objective of this course is to provide the students with basic
mathematical skills required to understand Computer Application Courses.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Set Theory and Real & Complex Number 7 Hrs.
Concept, Notation and Specification of Sets, Types of Sets, Operations on Sets
(Union, Intersection, Difference, Complement) and their Venn diagrams, Laws of
Algebra of Sets (without proof), Cardinal Number of Set and Problems Related to
Sets. Real Number System, Intervals, Absolute Value of Real Number.
Introduction of Complex Number, Geometrical Representation of Complex
Number, Simple Algebraic Properties of Complex Numbers (Addition,
Multiplication, Inverse, Absolute Value)

Unit 2 Relation, Functions and Graphs 8 Hrs.
Ordered pairs, Cartesian product. Relation, Domain and Range of a relation,
Inverse of a relation; Types of relations: reflective, symmetric, transitive, and
equivalence relations. Definition of function, Domain and Range of a function,
Inverse function, Special functions (Identity, Constant), Algebraic (lincar,
Quadratic, Cubic). Trigonometric and their graphs. Definition of exponential and
logarithmic functions, Composite function.(Mathematica)

Unit 3 Sequence and Series 7 Hrs,
Sequence and> Scries (Arithmetic, Geometric, Harmonic), Properties of
Arithmetic, Geometric, Harmonic sequences, A. M., G. M., and H. M. and
relation among them. Sum of Infinite Geometric Series. Taylor’s Theorem

(without proof), Taylor’s series, Exponential scries.
A

Parr Ai
Brees

Unit 4 Matrices and Determinants fe — 8 Hrs.
Introductions of Matrices, Types of Matrices, Equality of Matrices, Algebra of
Matrices, Determinant, Transpose, Minors and Cofactors of Matrix. Properties of
determinants (with out proof), Singular and non-singular matrix, adjoin and

Page | 18
NX
५

 

 
inverse of matrices.Linear transformations, orthogonal transformations; rank of
matrices. (Matlab)

Unit 5 Analytical Geometry 8 Hrs.

Conic Sections: Definitions ( Circle. Parabola, Ellipse, Hyperbola and Related
Terms), Examples to Explain The Defined Terms, Equations and Graphs of The
Conic Sections Defined Above, Classifying The Defined Conic Sections by
Eccentricity and Related Problems, Polar Equations of Lines, Circles, Ellipse,
Parabolas, and Hyperbolas. (Mathematica / Matlab)
Vectors in Space: Vectors in Space. Algebra of Vectors in Space, Length,
Distance Between |'wo Points, Unit Vector, Null Vector. Scalar Product, Cross
Product of Two and Three Vectors and Their Geometrical Interpretations and
Related Examples. (Matlab)

Unit 6 Permutation and Combination 7 Hrs.
Basic Principle of Counting, Permutation of a. Set of Objects All Different b. Set
of Objects Not All Different c. Circular Arrangement d. Repeated Use of The
Same Object. Combination of Things All Different, Properties of Combination.

Laboratory Works

Mathematica and/ or Matlab should be used for above mentioned topics.

Teaching Methods
The general teaching pedagogy includes class Icctures, group works, case studies,
guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (theorctical and
practical), tutorials and examinations (written and verbal). The teaching faculty
will determine the choice of teaching pedagogy as per the need of the topics.

Evaluation

Text Book

 
   
   

Examination Scheme

     
  
 

Internal Assessment External Assessment

Practical Practical | Total
20 20 60 100
(3 Hrs.) (3 Hrs.)

 
  

       

1. Thomas, G. B, Finney, R. S., “Calculus with Analytic Geometry”; Addison -

Wesley. 9th Edition. My Te

\
a) Page 19

C/

 
Reference Books
1. Bajracharya D. R., Shreshtha, R. M. & et al, “Basic Mathematics I, If’ Sukunda
Pustak Bhawan, Nepal

 

bo

Budnick, F. 8., “Applied Mathematics for Business, Economics and the Social

Sciences”, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited.

Monga, G. S., “Mathematics for Management and Economics”, Vikas Publishing

House Pyt. Ltd., New Delhi.

4. Paudel, K. C., GC. F. B., and et. al, “Higher Secondary Mathematics”, Asmita
Publication & Distributors Pvt. Ltd, Nepal.

5. Upadhayay, H. P., Paudel, K.C & ct al, “Elements of Business Mathematics”,

Pinnacle Publication.

Yamane, T. “Mathematics for Economist”, Prentice-hall of India.

B-
SG

w

A

Page | 20

TREES RSERSERSRSERPREREERSEERCEEEE

 
