Course Title: Society and Technology (3 Cr.)
Course Code: CACS102

Year/Semester: I/T

Class Load: 3 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3 Hrs.)

Course Description
‘This course covers several topics of sociology and impact of technology on
society that includes basic concept of sociology, organizing social life, social
system & social stratification of Nepalese societies, society & technology and
research in social sciences which are essential to make computer professionals
more responsible towards their society and social norms & values.

Course Objectives
The main objective of this course is to make the students familiar with the
disciplines of sociology. The goal is to enable them to analyze the Nepalese
society and culture; and to understand the relationship between individual,
Society and Culture.

Course Contents

Unit 1 Basic Concept of Sociology 6 Hrs.
Definition of Sociology, Nature and Scope of Sociology, Relationship of
Sociology with Other Social Sciences.

Unit2 Organizing Social Life 6 Hrs.
Society: Population size and Distribution, Culture Community, Norms and
Values, Status and Role, Institutions: Marriage, Family, Kinship and Groups.

Unit 3 Social System & Social Stratification of Nepalese Socicties, 9 Hrs.
Social Processes & Socialization. Social and Cultural Change in Nepal, Factors
of Social and Cultural Change in Nepal, Caste/Ethnicity based Stratification,
Gender based Stratification, Religion based Stratification, Ecological based
Stratification, National Integration: Historical Process of Nationhood, Cultural
Integration (Language, Rituals and Customs).

Unit 4 Society and Technology 12 Hrs,
Technological Society, ‘Technological Changes in Third World Society, Social
and Cultural bases of Technological change, Process and Patterns of Diffusion of
Innovation, Consequences of Technological Development on Nepalese Society.
Accountability of Computer Professionals towards Society.

Unit 5 Research in Social Science १. 12 Hrs.
Concept of Research in Social Science, Understanding the Concept of Research
Methods, Techniques and Tools: Interview, Focus Group Discussion.
Observation, Qualitative, Quantitative. and Mixed Method in Social Research,

1 vf १/ (२ Page | 13
1 &€ हँ (/,
Research Proposal and its Components: Identification of Research Problem,
Formulation of Objectives, Research Design, Formation of hypothesis/research
questions, Sampling design, tool and methods of data collection, Analysis and
Presentation of Data, Research Report Writing and Presentation, Computer
Softwares on Social Science Research.

Teaching Mcthods Mcthods

The general teaching methods includes class lectures, group works and
discussions, case studies, guest lectures, rescarch work. project work,
assignments and examinations (written and verbal), depending upon the nature of
the topics. The teaching faculty will determine the choice of teaching method
as per the nced of the topics.

Evaluation

   
 
 
 

    

| लाह | Scheme

40 60
(3 Hrs.)
Text Books

1. Andersen, M. L. & Taylor, H. F. (2007). Understanding sociology. New Delhi:
Cengage Learning India Private Limited.
Bista, D.B. (1996), People of Nepal. Kathmandu: Ratna Prakashan

3. Creswell, J. W. (2011). Research design: qualitative, quantitative and mixed
methods approach. New Delhi: SAGE

4. Haralambos M & Heald R. M , (2006). Sociology: Themes and perspectives.
New Delhi: Oxford University Press

 

  
       

Reference Books
Axclerence Books

I. Bryman, A. (2008). Social research methods (3rd ed). New York, New Delhi:
Oxford University Press. __ ४

2. Central Department of Sociology sand Anthropology (1987-2009). Occasional
papers in sociology and anthropology. Kathmandu.

Page | 14
