 

Course Title: Data Analysis and Visualization (3 Cr.)
Course Code: CACS455

Year/Semester: TV/VIII

Class Load: 5 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3Hrs. Practical: 2Hrs.)

Course Description

This course introduces to extend student’s knowledge and practice in data analysis and
visualization, software, and applications. It provides the board overview of techniques of the
visualization process, detailed view of visual perception, the visualized data and the actual
visualization, interaction and distorting techniques.

Course objectives

Upon completion of this course, students should be able to 1. Explain the concept of
visualization in the processing and analysis of data. 2. Develop visualization methods and
visualization systems using software applications. 3. Perform creative work in the field of
visualization.

Course Contents

Hours
Unit 1: Introduction to visualization
Introduction of visual perception, Visual representation of data, Data
Abstraction, Visual Encodings, Use of Color, Perceptual Issues, Information 6
overloads
Unit 2: Creating visual representations
Visualization reference model, Visual mapping, Visual analytics, Design of 7
Visualization applications.
Unit 3: Non spatial data visualization
Visualization of one, two and multi-dimensional data, Tabular data,
quantitative values (scatter plot), Separate, Order, and Align (Bar, staked
Bar, dots and line charts), Tree data, Displaying Hierarchical Structures,
graph data, rules for graph drawing and labeling, text and document data, 15
levels of text representation, visualizations of a single text document, word
cloud, flow data
Time series data, characteristics of time data, visualization time series data,
mapping of time
Unit 4: Spatial Data Visualization
Scalar fields, Isocontours (Topographic Terrain Maps), scalar volumes,
Direct Volume Rendering(Multidimensional Transfer Functions) , Maps 10
(dot, pixel ), vector fields
Defining Marks and Channels
Unit 5: Software tools and data for visualization
The iris data set, The Detroit Data Set, The Breakfast Cereal Data Set, The
Dow Jones Industrial Average Data Set (time series), MS spreadsheet,
Python, Matlab, Java, Tableau f * 10

seen ration Scheme 1]

 

 

 

 

36
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Internal Assessment External Assessment | Total ]
| Theory _| |__ Practical _| । पकाए | | Practical । 100
| | 20 | । 20075.) | GHrs.) | 6005) | | |
Laboratory Work

Laboratory work should be done covering all the topics listed above and a small project work
should be carried out using the concept learnt in this course using any one software tools
mention in unit 5.
Text Books:
3. Fry, Visualizing Data. O'Reilly Media, 2008, ISBN 0596514557
4. Ware, Information Visualization: Perception for Design, 3rd ed. Morgan Kaufmann,
2012,

Reference Books:
5. Telea, Data Visualization: Principles and Practice. A. K. Peters, Ltd, 2007, ISBN

ow
fH

1568813066,

 
