Course Title: Geographical Information System (3 Cr.)
Course Code: CACS454
Year/Semester: IV/VIII
Class Load: 5 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3Hrs. Practical: 2 Hrs.)
Course Description
This course offers detailed knowledge as well as practical skills on GIS theory, design and
implementation. It includes introduction, GIS and Map, GIS data sources and structures, spatial
data analysis, GIS data modeling and creating map apart from this this encourages to students
to develop a real time basic GIS project.
Course objectives
The general objectives of this course are to provide theoretical knowledge as well as practical
skills of geographical information system to make students capable of capturing, analyzing and
visualize real world data.
Course Contents
Unit 1: Introduction 6 Hrs.
1.1 Definition, functions and Applications of GIS
1.2 Components of GIS
1.3 GIS as Information System
1.4 Nature & Sources of GIS data
1.5 Recent trends and future of GIS
Unit 2: GIS and Map , 8 Hrs.
2.1 Map and their characteristics
2.2 Mapping concept and Techniques
2.3 Map Projection
Unit 3: GIS data Sources & Structures 12 Hrs.
3.1 Capturing GIS data
3.2 Sources: Maps, GPS, Images and Databases
3.3 Structures: Vector, Raster and TIN data structures
3.4 GIS data modeling
3.5 GIS database design
Unit 4: Spatial Data Modeling and Analysis 12 Hrs.
4.1 Spatial data modeling
4.2 Vector based analysis A
4.3 Raster based analysis ¥ त
Unit 5: GIS data modeling & Creating Maps 10 Hrs.
5.1 Surface modeling A q
5.2 Hydrology modeling Ry gk &
5.3 Designing and printing the map “> x v or

 

  

34
Laboratory Works

Students should develop basic GIS project implementing the concepts given in course of study
and may add more (if required).

Teaching Methods

The teaching faculties are expected to create environment where students can update and
upgrade themselves with the current scenario of computing and information technology with
the help of topics listed in the syllabus. The general teaching pedagogy that can be followed by
teaching faculties for this course includes class lectures, laboratory activity, group discussions,
case studies, guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments (Theoretical and
Practical), and written and verbal examinations.

 

 

 

 

Evaluation
Examination Scheme |
Internal Assessment External Assessment Total
Theo Practical Theo | Practical |
। 20 20 (375. 603Hrs) | - | |

 

 

 

 

 

Reference Books

1. Kang-tsung Chang, (2010). “Introduction to Geographic Information Systems” Tata
McGraw Hill, New Delhi.

2. C.P.Lo and Albert K.W.Yeung (2006). “Concepts and Techniques of Geographic
Information Systems” Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi.

3. Albert, C.T.L. and Yeung, K.W. (2002). “Concepts and Techniques of Geographical
Information Systems”, New Delhi: Prentice Hall.

4. Chakraborty, D. and Sahoo, R.N. (2007). Fundamentals of GIS. India: Viva Books.

5. ESRI guide to GIS analysis Andy Mitchell, ESRI press, Red lands AS

a) roy , टे

35

   
