SN

Course Name: Internet of Things (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS460

Year/Semester: [V/VIII

Class Load: 5 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3Hrs. Practical: 2 Hrs.)

Course Description: The course introduces basics of IoT. It covers introductions of 101,
Devices and platform for developingloT Systems, Design methodology, Data Analytics for IoT,
Servers & Cloud offering and IoT system security.

Objective:
The objective of this course is to introduce the students about the principles, techniques,
development and applications of IoT System.

Course Contents:
Unit 1: Introduction to IoT [8Hrs.]
1.1 Definition and Characteristics of IoT.
1.2 Physical and Logical Design of IoT.
1.3 loT Enabled Technologies
1.4 loT and M2M
1.5 Domain Specific loTs: Home Automation, Cities, Environment, Energy, Retail, Logistics,
Agriculture, Industry, Health and Lifestyle.

Unit 2: Sensor, Actuators and Interfacing [18 Hrs.]
2.1 Roles of Sensors and actuators, Types of sensors: Active and passive, analog and digital,
Contact and no-contact, Absolute and relative
2.2 Working of sensors: Position, occupancy and motion, velocity and acceleration, force, pressure,
flow, Acoustic, Humidity, light, radiation, temperature, chemical, biosensor, camera.
2.3 Development boards: Arduino and Raspberry pi installation, interfacing and programming using
python.

Unit 3: IoT Platform Design Methodology [6 Hrs.]
Case Study on oT System for Weather Monitor

Unit 4: Data and Amalytics for IoT (10Hrs.]
4.1 An Introduction to Data Analytics for loT
4.2 Machine Learning
4.3 Big Data Analytics Tools and Technology
4.4 Edge Streaming Analytics
4.5 Network Analytics

Unit 5: loT Physical Servers and Cloud Offering [3Hrs.] A
Cloud storage models and Communication APIs of loT Systems wre heey
Unit 6: Securing IoT Systems [3Hrs.]

6.1 loT Security Challenges
6.2 loTSystem’s Security Practices

  
Laboratory Work:

Implement the concept mentioned in the course using Python as a programming language, Arduino or
Raspberry pi as a System board. All sensors mentioned in course should be implemented in a single
project or separately to observe their working mechanism.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Evaluation:
Examination Scheme
Internal Assessment External Assessment Total
Theo Practical Theory | ___— Practical
20 20 60 -

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reference Books:

1. ArshdeepBahga, Vijay Madisetti, “Internet of Things (A Hands-on-Approach)”, University Press
India Pvt. Ltd., 2015.

2. David Hanes, Gonzalo Salgueiro, Patrick Grossetete, Robert Barton, Jerome Henry,"IoT
Fundamentals: Networking Technologies, Protocols, and Use Cases for the Internet of Things”,
Pearson Education (Cisco Press Indian Reprint)

3. Raj Kamal, “Internet of Things: Architecture and Design Principles”, McGraw Hill Education, 2017

4. Gary Smart, “Practical Python Programming for oT”, ISBN-10: 1838982469 err

5. Gaston C. Hillar Internet of Things with Python, ISBN-10: 1785881388 " “कछ

prone, ५ wo
रिषद्को
कीर्तिपुर

 
