Course Title: Machine Learning (3 Cr.)

Course Code: CACS456

Year/Semester: IV/VIIL

Class Load: 6 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3Hrs. Practical: 3Hrs.)

Course Description
This course presents comprehensive introduction to several topics on basic concepts and
techniques of Machine Learning (ML). It also explores the understanding of the Supervised
and unsupervised learning techniques, probability based learning techniques, performance
evaluation of ML algorithms and applications of ML.
Course objectives
Upon completion of this course, students should be able to 1. Explain the concept of supervised,
unsupervised and semi-supervised learning. 2. Develop algorithms to learn linear and non-
linear models using software. 3. Perform creative work in the field machine learning to solve
given problem.
Course Contents
Hours
Unit 1: Introduction to machine learning
History of machine learning, Brain-neuron learning system, Definition and
types of learning, need of machine learning, Data and tools, review of
statistics, training, validation and test data, theory of learning — feasibility of 10
learning — error and noise — training versus testing, generalization bound —
approximation-generalization tradeoff — bias and variance — learning curve

Unit 2 Introduction to Supervised Learning

Classification problems, Linear Regression- Predicting numerical value,
Finding best fit line with linear regression, Perceptron, learning neural
networks structures, Decision tree representation, appropriate problems for
decision tree learning, basic decision tree algorithm, support vector
machines, Separating data with maximum margin, Finding the maximum
margin,

11

Unit 3: Bayesian and instance based learning

Probability theory and Bayes rule. Classifying with Bayes decision theory, 11
Conditional Probability, Bayesian Belief Network, K-nearest neighbor
Unit 4:Introduction to un-supervised learning and dimensionality
reduction

Introduction to clustering, K- Mean clustering, different distance functions
for clustering, Hierarchical clustering, Supervised learning after clustering,
dimensionality reduction techniques, Principal component analysis

10

Unit 5: Measures for Performance Evaluation of ML algorithms

Classification accuracy, Confusion matrix Miéisclassification costs, A
Sensitivity and specificity, ROC curve, Recall and precision, box plot} Sion, f
confidence interval 1 6

Evaluation

   

 

y

tf?) , 38
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Internal Assessment External Assessment | Total |
Theory Practical Theory | Practical | 100
20 20 (3 Hrs.) 60 (3 Hrs.) | - |
Laboratory Work

Laboratory work should be done covering all the topics listed above and a small project work
should be carried out using the concept learnt in this course using software like matlab, python.
Text Books:
1. Tom M Mitchell, Machine Learning, First Edition, McGraw Hill Education, 2013.
2. Stephen Marsland, Machine Learning — An Algorithmic Perspective, Second Edition,
Chapman and Hall/CRC Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition Series, 2014.

Reference Books:
3. Peter Flach, Machine Learning: The Art and Science of Algorithms that Make Sense
of Data, First Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2012.

 

39
